    U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION 
Washington, D.C.  20507 

Office of the Chair 
Andrea R. Lucas, Acting Chair 

To:   Heads and Acting Heads of Departments and Agencies 

From:  Andrea R. Lucas, Acting Chair 

Date:  May 15, 2025 

Re:   Guidance to Agencies for Applying Deferred Resignation Program Agreements to 

Pending EEO Complaints  

The  Equal  Employment  Opportunity  Commission  is  the  federal  agency  charged  with 
coordinating  the  federal  government’s  employment  non-discrimination  effort.    The  EEOC  has 
administrative judges who conduct hearings on equal employment opportunity (EEO) complaints 
and  the  EEOC’s  Office  of  Federal  Operations  also  adjudicates  appeals  from  administrative 
decisions made by federal agencies on EEO complaints by those agency employers’ employees.   

Some federal government employees with pending EEO complaints may have elected to 
participate  in  the  Deferred  Resignation  Program  (DRP).  The  Office  of  Personnel  Management 
provided agencies with model language for their ensuing DRP Agreements, including a general 
release for all claims accruing prior to the Agreement’s execution.1 It is the EEOC’s position that 
the language  in the OPM-provided model release  applies to pending EEO complaints, whether 
pending before an agency employer or the EEOC.  The EEOC is aware that not all agencies chose 
to use the model DRP Agreement. And we have observed that some agencies used the model DRP 
Agreement  as  a  starting  point,  but  may  have  modified  or  eliminated  provisions,  including  the 
general claims release.  

If an employee with a pending EEO complaint has signed a DRP Agreement, the agency 
employer should review the Agreement and determine whether it includes a release of pending 
EEO complaints. If the employing agency determines the Agreement does release EEO complaints, 
the agency should, consistent with the Agreement and applicable law, take the following actions: 

(1) For EEO complaints pending with the agency (for example, the agency is completing 
an  investigation  or  writing  a  final  agency  decision  (FAD)),  the  agency  shall  stop 
 1614.110(b).  
processing and issue a final order dismissing the complaint per 29 C.F.R. 

§

1 See OPM Memorandum, “Legality of Deferred Resignation Program” (Feb. 4, 2025), 
https://www.opm.gov/media/xmxfp34k/opm-memo-legality-of-deferred-resignation-program-2-4-2025-final-1.pdf. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) For EEO complaints pending with an EEOC administrative judge, the agency employer 
shall  submit  a  motion  to  dismiss  with  a  copy  of  the  signed  Agreement  to 
fedsephearings@eeoc.gov. 

(3) For EEO complaints with open appeals or compliance matters pending at the EEOC’s 
Office of Federal Operations, the agency employer shall submit a motion to dismiss 
with a copy of the signed Agreement to fedsepappeals@eeoc.gov.  

The  EEOC  also  is  proactively  reviewing  cases  to  identify  complainants  who  have 
participated in the DRP. When the EEOC finds a potential match, we will seek confirmation from 
the agency employer. By partnering with the EEOC to promptly identify EEO complaints waived 
through the DRP, you can assist your agency and the EEOC in ensuring resources are appropriately 
directed to complaints that remain active. The EEOC’s team in the Office of Federal Operations is 
available to assist agencies that need further support in this matter or other EEO programmatic 
areas.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
