August 2024 

Effectiveness of Alternative Dispute Resolution 
in the Federal Sector 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Research, Evaluation, & Applied Data Division | Office of Federal Operations

Table of Contents 

Executive Summary .................................................................................... ii 

Introduction ................................................................................................ 1 

Purpose and Scope ...................................................................................... 2 

Methodology ............................................................................................. 3 

Profile of Federal Sector ADR ...................................................................... 4 

Survey on ADR Process ............................................................................... 9 

Perceptions of ADR Process ......................................................................... 9 

Other Survey Results ................................................................................ 14 

Focus Group of ADR Professionals ............................................................ 15 

Summary of Findings ................................................................................ 17 

Recommendations..................................................................................... 18 

Conclusion ................................................................................................ 18 

References ................................................................................................ 20 

Appendix A: Glossary ................................................................................ 21 

Appendix B: Survey Questions .................................................................. 22 

i 

 
 
 
Executive Summary 

Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) is a process in which a neutral third party 
helps parties to reach an agreement without litigation. Mediation is the most widely 
utilized method for dispute resolution. All Federal agencies are required to have an 
ADR program that is fair.1 Since Federal agencies may conduct ADR programs 
differently, the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) sought to 
better understand agencies’ ADR policies, practices, and complaint activity. 

This report follows up on an EEOC report published in fiscal year (FY) 20212 with 
comprehensive information and data on the effectiveness of ADR programs at 
Federal agencies in FY 2019. In this current report, the EEOC continued its review 
of agency ADR programs in FY 2021—specifically, examining Management Directive 
7153 program deficiencies and relevant Form 4624 complaint data. The report 
focuses on the experiences of complainants and managers who participated in ADR, 
primarily mediation. 

Main Findings 

• 

• 

In FY 2021, Federal agencies offered ADR more often during the pre-
complaint stage (87.8 percent of all completed counselings) than during the 
formal EEO complaint stage (17.0 percent of all complaint closures). 

In FY 2021, Federal agencies accepted ADR more often during the pre-
complaint stage (55.5 percent of all completed counselings) than during the 
formal EEO complaint stage (6.4 percent of all complaint closures). 

•  During the formal EEO complaint stage, approximately 33.6 percent of ADR 

closures led to resolutions (i.e., settlements or withdrawals). 

•  The rate of counselings and complaints was roughly proportional to the 
agency’s size. Notably, large agencies (those with 15,000 or more 
employees) accounted for 94.1 percent of the Federal workforce, 95.9 
percent of completed counselings, and 93.9 percent of formal complaints. 

•  Among 72 complainants surveyed, the majority (46) expressed 

dissatisfaction with the fairness of the ADR process. In contrast, of the 23 

1 “Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) Overview,” EEOC, https://www.eeoc.gov/Federal-sector/alternative-
dispute-resolution-adr-overview. 

2 Alternative Dispute Resolution in the Federal Sector, EEOC, 2021, https://www.eeoc.gov/federal-
sector/reports/alternative-dispute-resolution-federal-sector. 

3 The EEOC provides Management Directive 715 (MD-715) as policy guidance to Federal agencies for their use in 
establishing and maintaining effective programs of equal employment opportunity for all employees as required by 
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Rehabilitation Act. MD-715 took effect on October 1, 2003.  

4 Federal agencies covered by 29 CFR 1614 must report to the EEOC data on EEO complaint processing, beginning 
with pre-complaint counseling and ending with final disposition. Agencies report this information on the Annual 
Federal Equal Employment Opportunity Statistical Report of Discrimination Complaints (Form 462).  

ii 

 
responsible management officials (RMOs) surveyed, nearly all (22) indicated 
satisfaction with its fairness.  

•  A total of 41 complainants said they were considering leaving their agency in 
the next year, compared to only 6 RMOs. The top reason complainants gave 
for wanting to leave was retaliation due to ADR participation. 

Main Recommendations  

The EEOC recommends that Federal agencies: 

•  Provide training and education on the ADR process to employees, managers, 
supervisors, and settlement officials. Specifically, training should focus on the 
roles and expectations of management as well as outcomes from negotiated 
settlements. 

•  Keep ADR participants informed of the procedural steps throughout the ADR 
process, including the development of an ADR toolkit with FAQs for the ADR 
services offered, timelines for processing EEO complaints during the ADR 
process and information on their agency website explaining the ADR services 
offered. 

•  Create an agency tool (i.e., post-ADR survey or template) to collect feedback 

after the mediation process. This feedback can provide insights into the 
mediator’s effectiveness and whether the mediation was perceived as fair. 
Agencies should address any concerns raised through this feedback. 

•  Encourage good faith cooperation and participation among all parties in the 

ADR process to improve chances of reaching an agreement. 

•  Review and use the recommendations from the EEOC’s fiscal year 2021 ADR 

report. 

o  Quarterly ADR status briefings with senior agency leaders. 
o  Share ADR data on acceptance, participation, and declination rates. 
o  Improve collaboration between EEO and ADR program. 
o  Develop required training course for ADR program administration. 
o  Provide ADR training for managers, staff, and mediators. 
o  Provide quarterly ADR awareness training. 
o  Update ADR policies every three years at a minimum. 

Ongoing research is needed to understand employee perceptions of ADR. Federal 
agencies should evaluate their internal ADR programs and assess their 
effectiveness. 

iii 

Introduction 

Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) is a process in which a neutral third party 
helps parties to reach an agreement without litigation. ADR uses various 
techniques, such as mediation, peer review, fact finding, and facilitation. These 
techniques help to reduce conflict as well as the cost, delay, and unpredictability of 
the traditional adjudicatory processes.5 

Despite the limited research found on this topic, past literature in legal counseling 
found that ADR has both advantages and disadvantages. Professors O’Leary and 
Raines (2001) studied the ADR program at the U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency and found high survey satisfaction on the fairness of the ADR proceedings 
and the number of settlement options available. Professors Riley, Prenzler, and 
McKillop (2020) analyzed complaint cases from all police stations and oversight 
agencies in Australia and found high satisfaction after complainants used ADR 
options. Similarly, attorneys Schiffer and Juni (1996) analyzed complaint cases 
using ADR in the U.S. Department of Justice, and also found high satisfaction 
among complainants who used in-person mediations.  

Furthermore, researchers Saundry et al. (2018) highlighted numerous benefits of 
mediation in the UK’s public sector towards facilitating employee voice, asserting 
that ADR practices were more amenable to employees’ grievances than formal 
litigation. However, they also found a power imbalance in the mediation room that 
resembled a management process designed to stifle dissent rather than remedy 
discrimination (Saundry et al., 2018). Interview responses from aggrieved 
employees indicated that mediation was often used as a mechanism to get 
employees back to work, instead of addressing the underlying problems between 
management officials and their staff. Therefore, it’s essential to continue to study 
employee perceptions of ADR to identify and mitigate issues that limit the fairness 
and efficiency of these proceedings (Saundry et al., 2018).  

In the Federal sector, the Administrative Dispute Resolution Act (ADRA) of 19906 
was the first legislation requiring every Federal agency to implement a policy for 
the use of ADR. By 2000, the EEOC required all Federal agencies to establish or 
provide access to an ADR program for both the pre-complaint and formal complaint 
stages of the EEO process.7 Additionally, under EEOC regulation 29 C.F.R. § 
1614.603, agencies must make reasonable efforts to voluntarily resolve EEO 
discrimination complaints as early as possible and throughout the administrative 
process. 

5 “Types of ADR Techniques,” EEOC, https://www.eeoc.gov/Federal-sector/types-adr-techniques. 

6 Re-enacted in 1996 as the Administrative Dispute Resolution Act of 1996. 

7 “Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) Overview,” EEOC, https://www.eeoc.gov/Federal-sector/alternative-
dispute-resolution-adr-overview. 

1 

 
A 2021 study published by the Administrative Conference of the United States 
found that Federal agencies faced several challenges that impacted the 
effectiveness of ADR. These challenges included budgetary constraints, lack of 
trained personnel, and varying levels of support from agency leadership (Blankley 
et al., 2021). The study recommended that Federal agencies increase their ADR 
program visibility (e.g., through their website, speeches, and press releases), 
increase interagency collaboration, improve data collection and reporting (e.g., 
feedback from ADR participants), and provide more comprehensive training for ADR 
practitioners, among other recommendations (Blankley et al., 2021). 

In its fiscal year (FY) 2021 report, Alternative Dispute Resolution in the Federal 
Sector, the EEOC found that about 40 percent of Federal agencies had incomplete 
ADR policies in FY 2019, with “failing to state the timeline involved in the ADR 
process” being the most common issue. In addition, 4.3 percent of agencies had 
critical ADR program deficiencies, such as not requiring managers and supervisors 
to participate in ADR, allowing the manager named in the complaint to be the 
settlement authority, and failing to regularly assess the effectiveness of the ADR 
program.8 Lastly, survey results showed that a third of agencies did not conduct 
regular self-assessments of their ADR program’s effectiveness, while nearly a 
quarter did not annually evaluate their programs at all.9 

Purpose and Scope  

This follow-up report examines the impacts of Federal ADR programs on complaint 
activity and complainant satisfaction. In this report, EEOC researchers sought to 
answer: 

•  How often is ADR used? 

•  Does ADR reduce the number of formal complaints? 

•  How satisfied in ADR process were complainants and managers who 

participated?  

•  Does the ADR format (i.e., video conference, in-person, or phone) impact 

participant satisfaction? 

This report offers findings and recommendations to improve the ADR process for 
participants and reduce the number of formal complaints filed at Federal agencies. 
This report is intended to serve as a resource to assist Federal agencies in 
improving the utilization and effectiveness of ADR.  

8 Alternative Dispute Resolution in the Federal Sector, EEOC, 2021, https://www.eeoc.gov/federal-
sector/reports/alternative-dispute-resolution-federal-sector. 

9 Alternative Dispute Resolution in the Federal Sector, EEOC, 2021, https://www.eeoc.gov/federal-
sector/reports/alternative-dispute-resolution-federal-sector. 

2 

 
Methodology 

This report analyzed three years of complaint data from the Annual Federal Equal 
Employment Opportunity Statistical Report of Discrimination Complaints Data (Form 
462), from FY 2019 to FY 2021. Form 462 tracks equal employment opportunity 
(EEO) complaint activity at Federal agencies throughout each stage of the 
complaint process—pre-complaint, formal complaint, investigations, and closure. 
The EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations collects Form 462 data annually in 
accordance with 29 C.F.R. § 1614.  

The EEOC examined data collected from 154 Federal agencies out of a total of 526 
agencies and subagencies reported by the U.S. Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM). Agencies with less than 100 employees were removed from the analysis, as 
the prevalence of low or no EEO activity among these agencies skewed aggregate 
results. Agencies required to redact data for national security reasons were also 
removed. This removed a total of 6,456 employees from the overall analysis, not 
counting those removed from national security agencies. The discussion that follows 
analyzed data on the remaining 3.1 million Federal employees. 

In addition, EEOC researchers conducted a survey to gauge participant satisfaction 
and opinions on the ADR process. To gather more detailed feedback, the EEOC also 
conducted a focus group with ADR professionals, including mediators and 
counselors. 

3 

 
 
 
 
Profile of Federal Sector ADR 

The sample data drawn from Form 462 included approximately 3.1 million Federal 
employees in FY 2021. Figure 1 shows that the vast majority of them—94.1 
percent—worked at large Federal agencies (15,000 or more employees). By 
comparison, medium agencies (1,001 to 14,999 employees) employed 5.0 percent 
of workers, and small agencies (100 to 1,000 employees) another 0.9 percent of 
workers. 

Figure 1. Federal Employees by Agency Size, FY 2021 

Small

Medium Large

0.9%
(28,111)

5.0%
(154,973)

94.1%
(2,943,517)

Notes: Small agencies had between 100 and 1,000 employees. Medium agencies had between 1,001 and 14,999 
employees. Large agencies had 15,000 or more employees. 

Source: U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, Statistical Report of Discrimination Complaints Data 
(Form 462), FY 2021, Table B-1. 

4 

Across all sampled agencies in FY 2021, there were a total of 33,496 EEO 
counselings. Figure 2 shows that the number of counselings were roughly 
proportionate to agency size. For example, small agencies represented 0.9 percent 
of the workforce and 1.1 percent of all completed counselings, while large agencies 
represented 94.1 percent of the workforce and 95.9 percent of counselings.  

Figure 2. Completed Counselings by Agency Size, FY 2021 

Small

Medium Large

1.1%
(360)

3.1%
(1,023)

95.9%
(32,108)

Notes: Small agencies had between 100 and 1,000 employees. Medium agencies had between 1,001 and 14,999 
employees. Large agencies had 15,000 or more employees. 

Source: U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, Statistical Report of Discrimination Complaints Data 
(Form 462), FY 2021, Table B-1. 

5 

Formal complaints were also roughly proportionate to agency size. Figure 3 shows 
that large agencies accounted for the vast majority of formal complaints (93.9 
percent), while small agencies accounted for the fewest (1.7 percent). Overall, 
there were 12,906 formal complaints in FY 2021. 

Figure 3. Formal Complaints Filed by Agency Size, FY 2021 

Small

Medium Large

1.7%
(215)

4.5%
(575)

93.9%
(12,116)

Notes: Small agencies had between 100 and 1,000 employees. Medium agencies had between 1,001 and 14,999 
employees. Large agencies had 15,000 or more employees. 

Source: U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, Statistical Report of Discrimination Complaints Data 
(Form 462), FY 2021, Table B-1. 

6 

ADR was offered and accepted by complainants at different rates during different 
stages of the complaint process. Figure 4 shows that there were 33,496 completed 
counselings in FY 2021. During the pre-complaint stage, ADR was offered at 29,424 
(87.8 percent) of these counselings. Complainants accepted ADR in 18,595 (55.5 
percent) counselings.  

Figure 4. ADR Offers and Acceptances During Pre-Complaint Stage, FY 2021

s
g
n

i
l

e
s
n
u
o
C

l

d
e
t
e
p
m
o
C

33,496

29,424

18,595

40,000

30,000

20,000

10,000

0

Completed Counselings

Offered ADR

ADR Accepted

Note: ADR = Alternative Dispute Resolution. 

Source: U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, Statistical Report of Discrimination Complaints Data 
(Form 462), FY 2021, Table B-4. 

By comparison, figure 5 shows that ADR was offered and accepted by complainants 
far less often during the formal complaint stage. Out of 15,549 total complaint 
closures, ADR was offered for 2,645 closures (17.0 percent) and accepted for 998 
closures (6.4 percent). 

Figure 5. ADR Participation Rate During Formal Complaint Stage, FY 2021 

15,549

16,000

12,000

s
e
r
u
s
o
C

l

i

l

t
n
a
p
m
o
C

8,000

4,000

0

2,645

998

Complaint Closures

ADR Offered

ADR Accepted

Note: ADR = Alternative Dispute Resolution. 

Source: U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, Statistical Report of Discrimination Complaints Data 
(Form 462), FY 2021, Table B-19. 

7 

 
 
ADR closures mark a pivotal stage in the ADR process where parties either reach a 
settlement and subsequently draft and sign an agreement or proceed with the 
complaint if no settlement is reached. In the latter case, the investigation continues 
as if mediation had not occurred. Figure 6 shows that ADR proceedings had various 
outcomes in FY 2021. Out of 996 ADR closures, 31.0 percent (309 ADR closures) 
resulted in settlements. Another 2.6 percent (26 closures) ended in withdrawals. 
Thus, a total of 33.6 percent of all ADR closures led to resolutions (i.e., settlements 
and withdrawals). 

Figure 6. ADR Closures by Type, FY 2021

1,000

996

s
e
r
u
s
o
C
R
D
A

l

800

600

400

200

0

309

26

ADR Closures

ADR Settlements

ADR Withdrawals

Note: ADR = Alternative Dispute Resolution. 

Source: U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, Statistical Report of Discrimination Complaints Data 
(Form 462), Fiscal Year (FY) 2021, Table B-20. 

Overall, the data presented in this section suggests that ADR was more effective 
during the pre-complaint stage than the formal complaint stage—likely because 
during the pre-complaint phase both parties may still have an opportunity to 
preserve their relationships and prevent an escalation of conflict. ADR methods like 
mediation and negotiation allow each party to communicate directly and find 
mutually acceptable solutions without the adversarial nature of formal proceedings. 
Additionally, resolving disputes early in the ADR process can save a significant 
amount of time and resources compared to formal litigation or arbitration. It avoids 
the lengthy procedural steps and costs associated with formal proceedings, such as 
discovery, motions, and court appearances. ADR processes are generally less 
formal and rigid than formal litigation. This informality allows parties to tailor the 
process to their specific needs and issues, making it easier to explore creative 
solutions that may not be available through formal legal channels. Finally, some 

8 

 
focus groups participants believed that by the time ADR reaches the formal stage, 
both parties are firmly committed to their positions and ADR begins to lose its 
effectiveness.  

In FY 2021, ADR was offered at a rate five times higher during the pre-complaint 
stage compared to the formal stage, and it was accepted by complainants at a rate 
eight times higher. While only 6.4 percent of complainants accepted ADR during the 
formal stage, approximately one-third of all ADR closures resulted in resolutions, 
primarily through settlements. This highlights the effectiveness of ADR in achieving 
mutually agreeable outcomes even when initially met with resistance.  

Survey on ADR Process 

The EEOC conducted a survey10 to gather data on participant satisfaction with the 
ADR process. Due to limited resources, EEOC researchers restricted the survey to 
the same 24 agencies surveyed in the fiscal year 2021 ADR report. This survey was 
voluntary and remained open from May 17 to June 23, 2022—a total of 27 business 
days. Out of an estimated Federal workforce of 2 million, only 217 employees 
responded to the survey. Due to the small sample size, the EEOC did not use the 
survey results to produce findings or recommendations. However, the EEOC still 
encourages agencies to review this information to improve their ADR programs.  

The survey included a disqualifier (“Does your agency provide annual agency-wide 
ADR training?”) to focus only on the views of ADR participants. Out of the 217 
respondents, 99 did not know whether their agency provided annual agency-wide 
ADR training and 60 said their agency did not provide annual ADR training. Only 58 
respondents reported that their agency provided agency-wide ADR training 
annually. 

The survey asked whether respondents had participated in ADR as either 
complainants or responsible management officials (RMOs). Out of the 217 
respondents, 82 had not participated in ADR, 13 had participated but not as a 
complainant or RMO, and 10 did not answer. That left 112 respondents—83 who 
participated as complainants and 29 as RMOs. However, only 72 complainants and 
23 RMOs answered the remaining questions. 

Perceptions of ADR Process 

The EEOC’s Management Directive 110 states that, to ensure fairness, the ADR 
process should be voluntary, neutral, confidential, and enforceable.11 The survey 
asked all respondents whether they felt the ADR process was fair (figure 7). Of the 

10 For the purpose of this report survey data is explained by the number of responses in lieu of percentage because 
the participation rate was extremely low. 

11 For more detailed information, see Chapter 3 of EEOC Management Directive 110 
(https://www.eeoc.gov/Federal-sector/management-directive/chapter-3-alternative-dispute-resolution-eeo-
matters). 

9 

72 complainants who responded, most complainants did not feel it was fair, with 28 
strongly disagreeing and another 18 disagreeing. The opposite was true for RMOs; 
most of the 23 RMOs who responded felt that the ADR process was fair (10 strongly 
agreed and 11 agreed). Only 2 RMOs either strongly disagreed or disagreed. 

Figure 7. Was the ADR Process Fair? 

1

1

Strongly
Disagree

Disagree

Agree

Strongly Agree

4

5

0

Complainants

RMOs

28

18

22

11

10

10

15

20

25

30

Number of Respondents

Notes: RMOs = Responsible Management Officials. ADR = Alternative Dispute Resolution. 

Source: U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. 

The EEOC also asked complainants whether their complaint was fully resolved 
during ADR. Only ten out of 72 respondents said yes. In addition, most 
complainants (33) felt that the ADR process took too long. By comparison, 20 
complainants said the process was too short and 19 said ADR was completed in a 
fair amount of time. The EEOC asked RMOs whether their agency had sought 
feedback after ADR—14 said no, while nine said yes. 

Next, the EEOC surveyed both complainants and RMOs regarding their satisfaction 
with their ADR participation (see figure 8). Thirteen complainants and six RMOs 
reported having no prior expectations. Among complainants, 50 responded 
negatively, while only nine responded affirmatively. In contrast, most RMOs (14) 
reported that the ADR process met their expectations, with only three indicating 

10 

dissatisfaction. Respondents were able to specify reasons why the ADR process did 
not meet their expectations. Respondent responses included:  

• Yes, it’s common knowledge that ADR will NOT result in anything. ADR is

viewed as “part of the process.”

• The mediator was not familiar with agency policies and appeared to side with

the agency because of that lack of understanding.

•

I had a 15-minute phone call to state my case.

• The behavior decreased slightly and became more gaslighting, sabotage and
less visible. This behavior was not due to the ADA process but to a lack of
supervisory follow up and lack of accountability.

•

I felt like the process was a waste of time and no reasonable solution was
ever met, even with my willingness to meet them somewhere halfway.

Figure 8. Were Your Expectations for Participating in ADR Met? 

Complainants

RMOs

No

3

50

I did not have any
expectations

13

6

Yes

9

14

0

10

20

30

40

50

Number of Respondents

Notes: RMOs = Responsible Management Officials. ADR = Alternative Dispute Resolution. 

Source: U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. 

11 

The EEOC also assessed the satisfaction level with the ADR process (figure 9). The 
majority of complainants felt either very dissatisfied (34) or dissatisfied (17). In 
contrast, only 2 RMOs felt that way. Most RMOs felt either satisfied (14) or very 
satisfied (7) with the ADR process. 

Figure 9. Overall, How Satisfied Were You with the ADR Process?

Complainants

RMOs

34

Very
Dissatisfied

Dissatisfied

Satisfied

1

1

Very Satisfied

7

6

17

14

15

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

Number of Respondents

Notes: RMOs = Responsible Management Officials. ADR = Alternative Dispute Resolution. 

Source: U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. 

To dig deeper, the EEOC asked respondents whether they were considering leaving 
their organization within the next year (figure 10). Most RMOs (17) said no, as well 
as 31 complainants. However, a total of 41 complainants said they were considering 
leaving for various reasons. For example, 16 complainants said they were 
considering taking another job in the Federal Government and 2 complainants were 
considering taking a job in the private sector. By comparison, only a total of 6 
RMOs said they were considering leaving their agency within the next year. 

12 

Figure 10. Are You Considering Leaving Your Organization within the Next Year? 

Complainants

RMOs

31

17

21

16

No

Yes, Other Reason

Yes, to Take Another Federal Job

Yes, to Take Job Outside the Federal
Government

Yes, to Retire

1

2

2

1

2

2

0

10

20

30

40

Number of Respondents

Notes: RMOs = Responsible Management Officials. ADR = Alternative Dispute Resolution. 

Source: U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. 

The survey asked respondents who were considering leaving their agency whether 
participating in the ADR process had influenced that decision. Only six complainants 
and five RMOs said no. By comparison, 35 complainants and one RMO said yes for 
various reasons. Some reasons for ‘yes’ responses were: 

•

Fear of reprisal and exclusion from future promotion considerations.

• The harassment continued and reprisal for engaging in the EEO process.

• Need to address personal family matters.

Notably, 17 complainants reported that retaliation after participating in the ADR 
process had led them to consider leaving. 

13 

Other Survey Results 

The EEOC asked all respondents about the format used to conduct ADR (figure 11). 
The majority of complainants (49) and RMOs (15) indicated that ADR was 
conducted via video conferencing. By comparison, 10 complainants and three RMOs 
stated that ADR was conducted in-person. And another eight complainants and four 
RMOs stated ADR was conducted by telephone. 

Figure 11. How was ADR Conducted? 

Complainants

RMOs

Video
Conferencing

15

49

In-Person

3

Telephone

Other

1

10

8

4

5

0

10

20

30

40

50

Number of Respondents

Notes: RMOs = Responsible Management Officials. ADR = Alternative Dispute Resolution. “Other” allowed 
respondents to submit their own answers, such as email, phone plus email, and in-person but without all parties 
present. 

Source: U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. 

In addition, the survey asked the 23 RMOs whether their participation in ADR was 
voluntary—13 said yes, while the other 10 said no. Some agencies require 
management participation in ADR. The survey also asked the RMOs whether they 
had settlement authority, and the majority (18) reported they did. 

Next, the EEOC asked the complainants whether they were familiar with ADR before 
entering the process. Results were roughly split, with 39 answering no and the 
remaining 33 answering yes. The majority of complainants (53 out of 72) reported 
that ADR was completed during the pre-complaint stage. Furthermore, 
complainants had the option to specify one or more EEO issues and bases that 

14 

applied to their complaints. The top response was Harassment (Non-Sexual), which 
was selected 40 times, followed by Appointment/Hire, which was selected 26 times. 

The EEOC also asked complainants if anyone from management had participated in 
their ADR. Most complainants (59) said yes. When asked whether they trusted that 
the mediator was a neutral party, 40 complainants said yes, but 32 said no. 
Furthermore, most complainants (52) said that they were aware that they could 
terminate ADR at any time. That left 20 complainants who were not aware, which is 
concerning. EEO Counselors are required to inform the complainant about the 
stages of the EEO process and that they may choose between the agency’s ADR 
program and traditional EEO counseling.12 The EEO Counselor must also advise 
about other appropriate statutory or regulatory forums, such as the Merit Systems 
Protection Board or a negotiated grievance process. 

Most complainants (43) did not have a representative present. Only 15 
complainants had an attorney present and another 7 had a union representative 
present. The remaining seven complainants reported other options, such as a 
family member, a supervisor, or not being aware they could have an attorney 
present.  

Focus Group of ADR Professionals 

The EEOC initially sought to conduct a focus group of the RMOs who responded to 
the survey. However, not enough RMOs showed interest to conduct a focus group. 
As a result, the EEOC decided to conduct the focus group with Federally employed 
ADR professionals, such as counselors and mediators. This excluded EEO Directors, 
since they had already participated in a focus group discussed in the previous ADR 
report. 

To gather participants, the EEOC reached out to one of its EEO Specialists for 
referrals. The focus group took place on July 6, 2022 with 11 participants. All the 
participants provided feedback on their experiences with the ADR process and 
suggestions for improvements. 

The discussion centered around the following questions: 

1. How many times in the last year have you conducted an ADR during the

informal or formal complaint stage?

2. In your opinion, does the method and format in which ADR is conducted

contribute to the success of the process? Why?

3. Does the format contribute to the participant satisfaction? Why?

12 See Chapter 2 of EEOC Management Directive 110 (https://www.eeoc.gov/Federal-sector/management-
directive/chapter-2). 

15 

4. In your experience, how do you believe the ADR process is perceived by

participants? Do they feel satisfied with their experience? Why?

5. As an ADR Professional, what have been some challenges you have faced in

conducting ADR?

6. What is one obstacle that could explain low ADR participation rates at some

agencies?

7. What are some “promising practices” you’ve seen conducted by participating

agencies that could be helpful to other Federal agencies’ ADR process?

The vast majority of the ADR professionals (10 out of 11) mediated either informal 
or formal ADR sessions within the last three years. Overall, the group 
recommended that senior leadership, management officials, and legal 
representatives approach ADR not as adversaries but with the common goal of 
identifying the specific grievance and seeking a resolution to satisfy both parties. 
The group felt it was generally better to resolve issues at the lowest level possible 
before the formal complaint stage.  

In order to reach consensus, the group stressed that the right participants must be 
present during the ADR process. Any progress made may be derailed if an 
agreement is reached but later changed or denied. One ADR professional said that 
even changing a single word could nullify the entire agreement. Overall, the group 
felt that the interaction between the complainant and the alleged discriminating 
official was essential to work toward healing and resolution—especially early on. By 
the time the complaint reaches the formal stage, the parties are often entrenched 
in their positions. 

When asked about the impact of the ADR format, opinions within the group were 
divided. Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, most members had not utilized formats 
such as video conferencing, email, or telephone. The group acknowledged that 
COVID-19 necessitated a reevaluation of ADR options. However, the group 
expressed concerns that these remote formats sometimes made it challenging to 
discern whether others were actively engaged, potentially undermining trust in the 
ADR process. Ultimately, the group valued the interpersonal connections facilitated 
by face-to-face mediations.  

However, complainants may feel differently about the ADR format. For example, in 
cases that involve harassment, complainants often preferred not to meet in-person 
because they did not want to be in the same room as the alleged harasser. As an 
alternative, the ADR professionals preferred conducting ADR through video 
conferencing rather than telephone or email. Video conferencing offers the 
complainant the opportunity to be heard and the mediator the opportunity to 
observe the participants’ body language. As a result, the group felt that virtual 

16 

meetings played a positive role in ADR participant satisfaction in some cases, such 
as harassment cases. 

Next, the EEOC asked how ADR was perceived by participants. The group stated 
that some ADR participants felt like it was a “shakedown by management” or a 
“waste of time,” where agency attorneys were present to assess whether there was 
a legitimate case rather than to participate in good faith towards a resolution both 
parties could accept. One ADR professional said, “Once participants enter the 
process, reprisal becomes an issue because managers start to look for anything and 
everything to write up against the employee. People do not want sympathy. They 
want understanding.”  

The group felt that educating participants about ADR early in the process and 
having the settlement authority present may lead to a resolution more quickly. Still, 
the ADR process requires some patience. It may take a few sessions to reach a 
resolution, especially in the more complex cases. The group recommended that 
mediators follow up ADR with a survey. One ADR professional stressed that when 
the mediation is run well, even if the parties do not settle, the parties are thankful 
for the chance to sit down and talk. The better run the mediation, the likelier 
participants may become advocates for the ADR program. 

Summary of Findings 

In this report, the EEOC made several findings about the ADR process in FY 2021. 
The profile data revealed that ADR was offered and accepted far more often in the 
pre-complaint stage than during the formal complaint stage. During the pre-
complaint stage, ADR was offered in 87.8 percent of counselings and accepted in 
55.5 percent of them. In contrast, during the formal complaint stage, ADR was 
offered in 17.0 percent of closures and accepted in 6.4 percent of closures. 
Furthermore, only about a third of ADR closures in the formal complaint stage led 
to a resolution (either a settlement or withdrawal). This suggests that ADR was 
more effective early in the process.  

The survey revealed that complainants and responsible management officials 
(RMOs) often had opposite perceptions of the ADR process. Most complainants felt 
dissatisfied with the ADR process, saying it was unfair and did not meet 
expectations. As a result, many complainants reported that their participation in the 
ADR process had made them consider leaving their agency. In contrast, most RMOs 
felt the ADR process was fair and met expectations. Few RMOs were considering 
leaving their agency within the next year. 

Lastly, the focus group encouraged all ADR participants to be informed about the 
process before the first meeting. To reach a resolution more quickly, the group 
urged all parties and the settlement authority to be present throughout the ADR 
process. They also stressed that all parties should enter ADR in the spirit of 

17 

cooperating towards a mutually agreeable resolution. The group felt that 
management, more often than not, approached ADR with an adversarial mindset 
that eroded trust in the process.  

Given the above findings, the EEOC recommends that: 

Recommendations  

1.  Agencies should ensure that employees and managers receive annual 

training on the ADR process to increase awareness and understanding of the 
process. In addition, employees should be kept informed throughout every 
step of the ADR process.13 

2.  Mediators should continue the best practice of meeting with complainants 
and RMOs separately during the pre-complaint stage. In addition, the 
settlement authority14 should always be present in the room, in case a 
resolution is reached.  

3.  ADR professionals should focus on improving the experience of the ADR 

process for all parties, not just on reaching a resolution.  

4.  Agency leadership should show support for ADR by publicizing the agency’s 

ADR policy statement. 

5.  Agencies should create an agency tool (i.e., post-ADR survey or template) to 

collect feedback after the mediation process. This feedback can provide 
insights into the mediator’s effectiveness and whether the mediation was 
perceived as fair. Agencies should address any concerns raised through this 
feedback. 

6.  Agencies should review and implement the recommendations listed in the 

EEOC’s FY 2021 ADR report. 

Conclusion 

Disputes can happen in any workplace. Making all Federal employees aware of ADR 
can help agencies resolve disputes quicker and less costly than traditional 
adjudication methods. Ensuring that all parties come to the table with an open, 
cooperative mindset will contribute to a more effective ADR program. 

The EEOC would like to thank the participants of the survey and focus group 
discussed in this report. The findings discussed in this report show that ADR offers a 
viable option to prevent and resolve complaints of employment discrimination. The 
findings and recommendations in this report are intended to provide some insight 

13 For detailed guidance on providing ADR training, see Section II.C. of Chapter 3 of EEOC Management Directive 
110 (https://www.eeoc.gov/Federal-sector/management-directive/chapter-3-alternative-dispute-resolution-eeo-
matters). 

14 The RMO cannot be the individual with settlement authority. 

18 

 
into the use and effectiveness of ADR in the Federal sector. The information in this 
report is intended to assist Federal agencies in their efforts to combat 
discrimination and resolve EEO complaints in an effective manner. The EEOC will 
continue to offer guidance to Federal agencies on how to strengthen their EEO 
programs in an effort to become model employers.  

19 

 
 
 
References 

Blankley, K., Claussen, K., & Starr, J. (2021). “Alternative Dispute Resolution in 

Agency Administrative Programs.” In Administrative Conference of the United 
States. Administrative Conference of the United States. 
https://www.acus.gov/document/alternative-dispute-resolution-agency-
administrative-programs-final-report  

O'Leary, R., & Raines, S. (2001). “Lessons Learned from Two Decades of 
Alternative Dispute Resolution Programs and Processes at the U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency.” Public Administration Review, 61(6), 682-
692.  http://www.jstor.org/stable/3110003

Riley, M., Prenzler, T., & McKillop, N. (2020). “Alternative dispute resolution and 

mediation of complaints against police in Australia and New Zealand.” Police 
Practice and Research, 21:1, 3-17, DOI:10.1080/15614263.2018.1500284  

Saundry, R., Bennett, T., & Wibberley, G. (2018). “Inside the mediation room - 

efficiency, voice and equity in workplace mediation.” International Journal of 
Human Resource Management, 29(6), 1157-1177.  
https://doi.org/10.1080/09585192.2016.1180314 

Schiffer, L. J., & Juni, R. L. (1996). “Alternative Dispute Resolution in the 

Department of Justice.” Natural Resources & Environment, 11(1), 11–66. 
http://www.jstor.org/stable/40924308  

U.S. EEOC (2021). Alternative Dispute Resolution in the Federal Sector. U.S. Equal 

Employment Opportunity Commission. 

20 

Appendix A: Glossary 

•  Alternative Dispute Resolution: A variety of alternative approaches (such 
as mediation and arbitration) to resolving conflict instead of using traditional 
adjudicatory methods. 

•  Complaints: An EEO dispute during the formal complaint stage of the EEO 

process. 

•  Counselings: An EEO dispute during the pre-complaint stage of the EEO 

process. 

•  Neutral: "An individual who, with respect to an issue in controversy, 

functions specifically to aid the parties in resolving the controversy. This 
should be an impartial third party who has no vested interest in the outcome 
of a dispute.”15 

•  Resolution: Resolutions include settlements where individuals received 

monetary and/or non-monetary benefits and matters where the individual 
withdrew a counseling or a complaint from the EEO process.  

•  Settlements: A counseling or complaint where the individual received 

monetary and/or non-monetary benefits from the agency to withdraw the 
matter from the EEO process. 

•  Withdrawal: A counseling or complaint where the individual withdrew the 
matter from the EEO process without receiving any monetary and/or non-
monetary benefits from the agency. In the pre-complaint stage, a withdrawal 
is also referred to as “No Formal Complaint Filed.”16  

15 See Chapter 3 of EEOC Management Directive 110 (https://www.eeoc.gov/Federal-sector/management-
directive/chapter-3-alternative-dispute-resolution-eeo-matters). 

16 See Section K of the FY 2005 ADR report from the EEOC (Conclusion of ADR Report: ADR in the Federal Sector 
EEO Process for FY 2005 (https://www.eeoc.gov/Federal-sector/adr-report-adr-Federal-sector-eeo-process-fy-
2005). 

21 

 
 
 
Appendix B: Survey Questions 

The EEOC survey on the ADR process asked 30 questions along two separate paths: 
one for complainants and another for responsible management officials (RMOs). 
However, both complainants and RMOs were asked the following 6 questions: 

• How was ADR conducted?

• Were your expectations for participating in ADR met?

• To what extent do you agree with this statement: The ADR process was fair?

• Overall, how satisfied were you with the ADR process?

• Are you considering leaving your organization within the next year, and if so,

why?

• Did participating in the ADR process influence your decision to consider

leaving your organization?

Complainants only were asked: 

• Were you familiar with ADR prior to entering into the process?

• Please identify the issue(s) involved in your complaint.

• What was the basis or bases of your complaint addressed during ADR?

• Did anyone from management participate in the ADR Process?

• As a complainant, did you trust that your mediator was a neutral party?

• Were you aware that you could terminate ADR at any point of the process?

• Did you have an attorney or other representative (e.g., union official) present

during the ADR process to provide you with support and advice?

• Was your complaint fully resolved during ADR?

• As a complainant, what was the length of time it took to resolve the issue?

RMOs only were asked: 

• As the individual named as the RMO, was your participation in ADR

voluntary?

• As a RMO or Agency Official, do you have settlement authority?

• Did your agency seek feedback after your mediation?

• EEOC will convene a focus group of RMOs for further discussion on this topic.

Would you be willing to be a member of this group?

22 

