Guide to Appeal Brief Writing for Unrepresented Complainants  
before the EEOC Office of Federal Operations 

I. 

Introduction 

This guide helps people without legal training prepare written arguments 
called appeal briefs. You will find general information, such as time requirements for 
filing briefs, as well as helpful suggestions for organizing, formatting, and writing a 
brief. 

II.  General Information About Appeal Briefs and Due Dates 

What is an appeal brief? 

An appeal brief is an optional written document where the parties explain to the 
EEOC Office of Federal Operations why an earlier decision by a federal agency or 
EEOC Administrative Judge made a mistake or decided the case correctly. Two briefs 
may be filed during the appeals process: 

•  A brief or statement in support of the appeal. 

This brief usually sets out the history of the case, explains to the EEOC Office of 
Federal Operations the mistake or error that the previous decision made, and 
argues why the previous decision should be reversed. 

•  A brief or statement in opposition to the appeal. 

This brief responds to the arguments raised in the brief in support of an appeal 
(when filed by a complainant it is responding to an appeal by the agency) and sets 
out arguments that the previous decision was correct and should be affirmed. 

Due Dates for Filing Briefs 

•  Brief or statement in support of the appeal. 

A brief in support of an appeal must be filed within 30 calendar days of filing the 
appeal.  

•  Brief or statement in opposition to the appeal. 

If the agency files an appeal and a supporting brief, you may file a brief in 
opposition to the appeal within 30 calendar days from when you receive the 
agency’s brief in support of its appeal.   

 
 
 
 
•  Brief or statement in support of a request for reconsideration. 

If you request the EEOC reconsider one of its prior appellate decisions, you can 
submit a brief or statement to support your request for reconsideration. You must 
file your brief at the same time as you file your request for reconsideration. 

III.  How to File Your Brief 

Online through the EEOC Public Portal (https://publicportal.eeoc.gov)   

The EEOC Public Portal is a secure, web-based application that allows individuals 
with discrimination complaints against the federal government to submit and receive 
documents supporting their appeal. 

If you use the Public Portal to submit your brief, the Public Portal will automatically 
notify the agency; you do not need to send a copy to the agency. Even if you did not 
file your appeal using the Public Portal, you may still file your brief using the Portal. 

Mail by U.S. Postal Service 

Mail your brief to: 

Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
Office of Federal Operations 
P.O. Box 77960 
Washington, D.C. 20013 

If you mail your brief to EEOC, you must mail a copy of your brief to the agency at 
the same time. 

IV.  How to Organize Your Brief 

There is no required format for briefs, but you may find it helpful to organize your 
brief into the following sections. 

Coversheet 

Because the filing of the appeal and brief can happen separately, a coversheet with 
identifying information helps ensure that your brief will be paired with the right 
appeal. A coversheet should have: the names of the parties, the Agency Complaint 
Number, an EEOC Hearing Number (if applicable), and the EEOC Appeal Number. 
Here is a sample: 

2 

 
 
 
 
U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION 

OFFICE OF FEDERAL OPERATIONS  

Jane Doe 

Complainant, 

vs. 

U.S. Dept. of XYZ (Sub-agency) 

Agency. 

____________________ 

) 

) 

) 

) 

) 

)  

) 

) 

EEOC Appeal No. 202100ZZZZ 

EEOC Hearing No. (if applicable): N/A 

Agency Case No. 123-ABC-XXX 

Check which brief this is: 

☒   BRIEF IN SUPPORT OF APPEAL 

☐  BRIEF IN OPPOSITION TO APPEAL 

Your Name:   

Jane Doe 

Address:  

123 Anywhere Lane 

Anytown, MD XXXXX 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Background Information on Discriminatory Actions; Procedural History of EEO 
Complaint(s) 

This section should explain in chronological order the discriminatory events that 
happened which caused you to file an EEO complaint. List only the specific facts 
connected to the issues on appeal. You may also describe the relevant procedural 
history of the EEO complaint.  

The EEOC Office of Federal Operations will generally only consider information that 
was provided during the investigation or during the hearing process. This means now 
you cannot include new facts or evidence that was not presented earlier. The only 
exception is if you can show that the evidence was not reasonably available prior to or 
during the investigation or during the hearing process.  

If you can, you should include the specific page or pages in the record where that fact 
can be found. See the section below on citations to the record for more information. 

Standard of Review 

When the EEOC Office of Federal Operations reviews an issue on appeal, it needs 
some kind of rules or guidelines to determine whether the previous decision made an 
error. Different kinds of rulings require different kinds of review guidelines. These 
guidelines are called standards of review. The three most common standards of 
review are: de novo review, substantial evidence, and clearly erroneous.  

This section should state the standard of review the EEOC Office of Federal 
Operations should apply to your appeal. To determine which standard of review 
applies, use the table below to match the type of decision being appealed with the 
corresponding standard of review. 

What is being appealed? 

Standard of review used on 
appeal 

Procedural final agency decision 

De novo review 

A final agency decision that 
dismisses your complaint on 
procedural grounds (such as failing 
to state a valid claim of 
discrimination, untimely contacting 
an EEO counselor, or untimely 
filing the EEO complaint). 

What the EEOC Office of 
Federal Operations will do under 
this standard of review 
The Commission will examine the 
record without regard to the factual 
and legal determinations of the 
previous decision. The Commission 
will review the documents, 
statements, and testimony of record, 
including any timely and relevant 
submissions of the parties, and the 
Commission will issue its decision 
based on the Commission's own 
assessment of the record and its 
interpretation of the law. 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
Final agency decision on the 
merits 

De novo review 

A federal agency’s final decision 
that determines you were not 
subjected to discrimination or finds 
you were subjected to 
discrimination but does not give 
you the remedies you believe you 
deserve. 

De novo review 

Summary judgment decision 
(decision without a hearing) by 
an EEOC administrative judge 

An EEOC administrative judge 
issues a decision in favor of one 
party without a full hearing 

Decision by an EEOC 
administrative judge after a full 
hearing 

Substantial evidence for factual 
findings (including whether there 
was discriminatory intent) 

5 

Generally, no new evidence will be 
considered on appeal unless a party 
shows that the evidence was not 
reasonably available prior to or 
during the investigation or during 
the hearing process. 
The same as above, except 
following de novo review, the 
Commission will the examine the 
merits of the employment 
discrimination claims based on a 
preponderance of the evidence.  

Under this evidentiary standard, a 
complainant satisfies the burden of 
proof by offering evidence that 
demonstrates their claim of 
employment discrimination has a 
greater than 50% chance to be true. 
In other words, if a complainant can 
convince the EEOC Office of 
Federal Operations that 
discrimination more likely than not 
occurred, the complainant meets his 
or her burden of proof, and the 
Commission will find that 
discrimination occurred. 
Same as above, except the 
Commission will determine if it 
was appropriate for the EEOC 
administrative judge to issue 
summary judgment. Issuing 
summary judgment is not 
appropriate if a case can only be 
resolved by weighing conflicting 
evidence. 

If the Commission finds that 
summary judgment is appropriate, 
the Commission will then examine 
the merits of the employment 
discrimination claims based on a 
preponderance of the evidence (see 
above for an explanation of 
preponderance of the evidence). 
The Commission will give 
deference to an administrative 
judge's post-hearing factual 
findings based on evidence in the 
record.  

For example, an administrative 
judge finds a management witness’ 
testimony credible based on the 
demeanor or tone of voice during 
the hearing. The Commission will 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
De novo review for legal 
determinations 

Clearly erroneous standard 

A previous appellate decision 
issued by the EEOC Office of 
Federal Operations  

A party may request that the EEOC 
Office of Federal Operations 
reconsider one of its initial 
decisions. 

accept the administrative judge’s 
credibility determination, unless 
documents or other objective 
evidence so contradicts the 
testimony of the witness or the 
testimony of the witness otherwise 
so lacks in credibility that a 
reasonable fact finder would not 
credit it. 

The Commission will review legal 
determinations made by an 
administrative judge or agency 
without presuming that the previous 
decision-maker was correct in 
interpreting or applying the law. 
The Commission may reconsider a 
previous decision if a party 
demonstrates that the earlier 
appellate decision involved a 
clearly erroneous interpretation of 
material fact or law. Did the 
previous decision make a clear, 
obvious error that affected the 
outcome of the appeal? 

Understanding which standard of review will be used will help you make relevant 
arguments to support your appeal.  

For example, say you are alleging that a supervisor subjected you to sexual 
harassment. Part of your allegations include an incident on May 4 when the 
supervisor said that you were “my girl” and forcibly kissed you. The supervisor 
testified that he did not say that phrase on May 4 and he gave you a friendly hug. In 
terms of the “my girl” reference, he testified that on May 10 he used that phrase to ask 
a male coworker what movie he was watching: “I asked the coworker whether he was 
watching Forrest Gump, which is my girl, the phrase was there, or was it Old School, 
which is my boy.” 

Scenario 1: Appeal from a final agency decision on the merits 

The agency issued a final decision, finding no discrimination because the 
supervisor’s testimony was more credible.  

On appeal, the standard of review is de novo review, which means the 
Commission does not have to defer to the Agency’s credibility determinations.  

In your brief, you can argue in detail why your version is more credible than 
the supervisor’s version. You may argue, for example, that the supervisor had 
made prior inconsistent statements; he was biased; the supervisor’s version is 
contradicted by other coworkers who witnessed the conversation and your 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
appearance and reaction after the forcible kissing; or the inherent 
improbability of the supervisor’s version of events. See, e.g., Complainant v. 
Department of the Army, EEOC Appeal No. 0120111865 (July 9, 2014) 
(finding the supervisor's account, that he juxtaposed the phrase "my girl" with 
asking whether someone was watching "Forrest Gump" to be implausible.), at 
https://www.eeoc.gov/sites/default/files/migrated_files/decisions/0120111865.
txt 

Scenario 2: Appeal from an administrative judge’s summary judgment decision 

An EEOC administrative judge issued a summary judgment decision in favor 
of the Agency. The administrative judge found it appropriate to issue summary 
judgment because there was no genuine issue of material fact, even when all 
the evidence was considered in the light most favorable to the complainant. 
The administrative judge then determined that the complainant failed to prove 
she was subjected to sexual harassment. 

On appeal, the standard of review is de novo review, which means the 
Commission does not have to defer to the administrative judge’s factual 
findings or legal determinations. 

In your brief, you cannot simply repeat the same arguments made in scenario 
1. Rather, you should argue that the administrative judge made a mistake in 
granting summary judgment because this case can only be resolved by 
weighing conflicting evidence.  

For example, you can argue that your testimony, and the testimony of other 
coworkers, establish that on May 4, your supervisor verbally harassed you by 
trying to claim possession over you when he declared you were “my girl.” 
Moreover, he made unwelcome physical contact by forcibly kissing you. The 
supervisor testified that this conversation never took place on May 4, and 
instead refers to a different conversation with a different coworker on May 10. 
Moreover, he denied kissing you and instead gave a consensual friendly hug. 
The only way to resolve this conflicting evidence about what happened on 
May 4 is to hold a hearing. Therefore, you ask the Commission to reverse the 
administrative judge’s summary judgement decision and remand the matter for 
a hearing. 

Scenario 3: Appeal from an administrative judge’s decision after a full hearing 

An EEOC administrative judge conducts a full hearing and listens and 
observes the witnesses as they testify. After the hearing, the administrative 
judge issues a decision, finding the supervisor more credible and concluding 
that there was no sexual harassment. 

7 

 
On appeal, the standard of review is substantial evidence for post-hearing 
factual findings. This means the Commission will accept the administrative 
judge’s credibility determination, unless the complainant shows one of two 
things: 

o  documents or other objective evidence so contradicts the testimony of the 

o 

supervisor that a reasonable fact finder would not credit it; or 
the testimony of the supervisor otherwise so lacks in credibility that a 
reasonable fact finder would not credit it. 

In your brief, you cannot simply repeat the same arguments made in scenarios 
1 or 2. Instead, you could try to highlight documents or other objective 
evidence that casts great doubt on the credibility of the supervisor’s testimony. 
For example, you can point to contemporaneous emails or text messages from 
the supervisor who consistently expressed his belief that “You are my girl.” 
His subsequent texts after the incident also reference the kiss. Such 
documentary evidence so contradicts the supervisor’s testimony at the hearing 
that the administrative judge should not have credited it. 

The Law That Should Be Applied 

If you believe that the previous decision applied the wrong law to your case, explain 
in this section what law should be applied to decide your appeal. Legal authorities 
may include EEOC regulations, laws passed by the U.S. Congress, judicial decisions, 
especially those issued by the U.S. Supreme Court, and EEOC federal sector 
administrative appellate decisions.  

It may be difficult for people representing themselves to determine the appropriate 
law. If you are not able to figure this out, you can skip this section. 

Arguments on Appeal 

If you are the appealing party, explain in this section why the previous decision was 
wrong. For example, did the previous decision incorrectly decide the facts? If so, 
what facts? If you can, you should include the specific page or pages in the record 
where that fact can be found. This allows the EEOC Office of Federal Operations to 
understand whether a factual assertion is accurate. If you do not provide supporting 
cites for factual statements, it is harder for the EEOC Office of Federal Operations to 
fairly consider the factual arguments you raise. 

If you think the previous decision applied the wrong law, how should the case be 
decided if the EEOC applied the right law? Do you feel that there are other reasons 
why the previous decision was wrong? If so, what are they? If making multiple 
arguments, you may want to use headings to separate each argument.  

8 

 
If you are the party opposing the appeal, explain why the previous decision was 
correct. 

It is important to include all of your arguments in your brief. If you later submit an 
additional brief, it may not be considered by the EEOC Office of Federal Operations 
because each party is allowed only one brief. 

Actions that EEOC Should Take in This Appeal 

Explain what you want the EEOC Office of Federal Operations to do to the previous 
decision: reverse or change the previous decision; affirm or keep the previous 
decision; or some other action.  

Additionally, if the Commission will determine in this appellate decision whether you 
were discriminated or not, what type of relief do you want if the Commission finds in 
your favor? The types of relief available are listed in the sample briefs. 

Certificate of Service 

Include the date the brief was sent to OFO and the way you filed it (Public Portal, 
U.S. Mail, FedEx, etc.) and, if mailed, the date a copy was sent to the agency and how 
it was sent to the agency. 

Here is a sample: 

CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE 

I certify that on September 15, 2021, this brief was filed with the EEOC’s Office of Federal 
Operations and served on the Agency, U.S. Dept. of XYZ, via the EEOC Public Portal.   

Jane Doe 

V.  How to Format Your Brief 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
There is no required format for briefs, but you may find helpful the following suggestions for 
formatting. 

Font and Font Size 

For typed briefs, a font size between 12 to 14 will help with legibility and readability.  

While the EEOC accepts handwritten briefs, we do not recommend it. 

Citations to the Record 

You should follow every factual statement that you make in your brief with a citation 
to the record. The record contains all of the paperwork filed in the EEO process, 
which usually includes the report of investigation, exhibits, the administrative hearing 
transcript, motions, orders, and the final decision or action from the case. Citing to the 
record will help the EEOC Office of Federal Operations understand whether a factual 
assertion is accurate. If you do not provide supporting cites for every factual 
statement, it is harder for the EEOC Office of Federal Operations to fairly consider 
the issues you raise. 

If you refer to documents in: 

o 

the Report of the Investigation, cite to them as (ROI __) and put the page 
number in the blank; 

o  an exhibit, cite to them as (Exh. __ at ___) and put the exhibit number in 

the first blank and the relevant page number from that exhibit in the second 
blank; 

o  The hearing transcript, cite to them as (Tr. ___) and put the page number in 

the blank. 

For example, if you say in your brief, "The Agency denied my request for reasonable 
accommodation on July 14, 20XX” you should provide a citation to the record to 
support that statement. 

o  “The Agency denied my request for reasonable accommodation on July 14, 
20XX.” (ROI 110). (ROI 110) means that on page 110 of the Report of 
Investigation, there is a document that supports the statement that you were 
denied a reasonable accommodation on July 14, 20XX. Page 110 may be 
an email from the disability program manager informing you of the denial, 
or an affidavit where your supervisor testified that he told you about the 
denial in a meeting on that date. 

o  “The Agency denied my request for reasonable accommodation on July 14, 
20XX.” (Exh. 2b, at 3). (Exh. 2b, at 3) means that page 3 of Exhibit 2b 
contains a document that supports the statement that you were denied a 
reasonable accommodation on July 14, 20XX. Page 3 of Exhibit 2b may 

10 

 
 
contain an official letter of denial of your reasonable accommodation 
request. 

o  “The Agency denied my request for reasonable accommodation on July 14, 
20XX.” (Tr. 301). (Tr. 301, 346-47) means that pages 301, 346, and 347 of 
the hearing transcript contain testimony that supports the statement that 
you were denied a reasonable accommodation on July 14, 20XX.” Page 
301 may be testimony from the disability program manager recounting 
when the email was sent informing you of the denial. Pages 346 to 347 
may be testimony from your supervisor about being copied on the email 
notifying you of the denial of reasonable accommodation. 

When you are citing to documents contained in the Report of Investigation or other 
parts of the record, you do not need to attach copies of those documents to your brief. 
The agency is required to submit a copy of the record including: the complaint file, 
Report of Investigation, and any documents once the case went before an EEOC AJ 
(if applicable). However, if you believe there is something missing from the agency’s 
record, please discuss this information in your brief and, if possible, attach a copy of 
the document or other evidence you believe is missing. 

Citations to Case Law 

Case law are legal propositions that are based on administrative appellate and judicial 
decisions rather than on statutes. You do not need to cite to case law in your brief. But 
if you are aware of a case supporting your argument, you may cite to it.  

Where can you research case law?  

•  You can read published administrative appellate decisions at 
https://www.eeoc.gov/federal-sector/appellate-decisions.  

•  Particularly noteworthy administrative appellate decisions are listed at 

https://www.eeoc.gov/federal-sector/selected-noteworthy-federal-sector-appellate-
decisions.  

•  You can review summaries of decisions by topic in the Digest of Equal 

Employment Opportunity Law, at https://www.eeoc.gov/digest.  

While there is no required format for citing to a case, this is the way we cite previous 
EEOC administrative appellate decisions: 

• 

Initial EEOC appellate decision: the name of complainant or pseudonym v. the name 
of the agency (the name of the subagency is in parenthesis), EEOC Appeal No. 
_____ (date of the decision). 

11 

 
 
 
Example: Jones v. U.S. Department of Justice (Federal Bureau of Prisons), EEOC 
Appeal No. 01996624 (Nov. 1, 2001). 

•  EEOC decision upon a request for reconsideration: the name of complainant or 

pseudonym v. the name of the agency (the name of the subagency is in parenthesis), 
EEOC Request No. _____ (date of the decision). 

Example: Adams v. U.S. Department of Justice (Federal Bureau of Prisons), EEOC 
Request No. 05990718 (May 16, 2001). 

•  EEOC decision upon a petition for review of a decision by the U.S. Merits Systems 
Protection Board: the name of complainant or pseudonym v. the name of the agency 
(the name of the subagency is in parenthesis), EEOC Petition No. _____ (date of the 
decision). 

Example: Petitioner v. Department of Homeland Security, EEOC Petition No. 
0320110053 (July 10, 2014) 

When looking for complainant’s names in decisions, you may find some published 
decisions do not list complainants’ names. This is because from October 2013 to 
October 2015, the Commission used the term “Complainant” or “Petitioner” in the 
caption of cases, rather than complainants’ names to protect privacy interests. After 
October 1, 2015, all federal sector appellate decisions issued for publication use a 
randomly generated name as a substitute for the name of the complainant. This 
randomly generated name consists of a first name and last initial, and is assigned 
using a computer program that selects names from a list of pseudonyms bearing no 
relation to the complainant's actual name. 

VI.  What To Focus on in Your Brief 

Briefs Involving Appeals from Procedural Dismissals 

If the Agency or AJ dismissed a complaint on “procedural” grounds (such as untimely 
EEO Counselor contact, failure to state a claim, etc.), rather than making a 
determination as to whether or not discrimination occurred (on the “merits”), you 
should not argue the merits of the complaint in your brief.  Rather, you should focus 
on what you believe is improper about the Agency’s procedural dismissal.   

For example, if the agency dismissed your complaint on the grounds that the formal 
complaint was not filed within 15 days of receipt of the Notice of Right to File, you 
should clearly state in your brief why your formal complaint should be considered 
timely by clearly identifying significant dates, such as receipt of the Notice of Right 

12 

 
 
 
 
to File and the manner and date that the formal complaint was filed.  If you have 
proof of those dates (such as a certified-mail receipt or a copy of an e-mail), attach a 
copy to your brief and “cite” or reference it in the brief.   

Please refer to Attachment I for a sample brief involving an appeal from a procedural 
dismissal. 

Briefs Involving Appeals from Final Agency Decisions/Final Order on the Merits  

If you are appealing a final agency decision or final order on the merits of the 
complaint that found that discrimination did not occur, your brief should focus on 
why you believe the agency’s/Administrative Judge ‘s (AJ’s) finding is incorrect.  For 
example, if you believe that the agency/AJ overlooked or misinterpreted a significant 
fact, the brief should discuss, in detail, what specific facts were overlooked or 
misinterpreted and should reference specific documents or testimony in the record 
that support your position.  If you believe the agency/AJ misapplied the law, the brief 
should set forth in detail the agency’s/ AJ’s error.  If the decision involved an AJ 
issuing a merits decision without a hearing (summary judgment), the brief should set 
forth why the matter should be sent back for a hearing, such as if the AJ needs to 
make specific credibility determinations or if the record is not adequately developed. 

Please refer to Attachment II for a sample brief involving an appeal from a final 
agency decision on the “merits." 

Brief in Opposition to Appeal 

If an AJ reached a decision that was partly or entirely in your favor, and the agency 
disagrees with that decision, the agency must file an appeal with the EEOC. The 
agency will then submit a brief in support of its appeal, and you will have the 
opportunity to respond by submitting an opposition brief.  Your brief should address 
each of the arguments raised by the agency in its brief. 

Briefs Involving Appeals from Final Determinations Finding No Breach of 
Settlement Agreements or Agency’s Failure to Implement Its Own Decision 

If you are appealing a final determination finding no breach of an EEO Settlement 
Agreement or an agency’s own decision finding discrimination, your brief should 
clearly identify what specific provisions of the settlement agreement or agency 
decision you believe to have been breached and why you believe the agency’s 
reasoning finding no breach is incorrect; or what remedy the agency promised in its 
decision that it has not provided. 

Briefs in Support of Requests for Reconsideration 

If you are submitting a brief in support of a request for reconsideration, your brief 
should focus on: a) that OFO’s initial decision involved a clearly erroneous 

13 

 
interpretation of material fact or law; or b) OFO’s initial decision will have a 
substantial impact on the policies, practices, or operations of the agency.  

A fact or point of law is “material” if changing it would affect the outcome of the 
case. You should clearly specify what material facts/law were misinterpreted in 
OFO’s initial decision and reference documents and/or testimony in support of your 
argument. A request for reconsideration is not a second chance at an appeal and you 
must identify and address what you believe are errors in the original appellate 
decision upon which reconsideration is sought. 

VII.  Sample Briefs 

Attachments I and II provide sample briefs. Attachment I is a sample brief involving an 
appeal of a procedural dismissal. Attachment II is a sample brief involving an appeal of a 
decision on the merits of a claim of discrimination.  

VIII. Checklist for Filing Your Brief 

You may find the following checklist helpful when submitting your brief. 

  

Clarity and Conciseness 

  

   

   

Stay focused on your arguments and avoid providing too much background 
information or irrelevant information. Avoid using legal jargon. 

Timeliness 
Pay close attention to the deadlines for filing your appeal and brief. Failure to 
follow time requirements may result in the denial of your appeal or the EEOC 
Office of Federal Operations not considering your brief. 

Cite to the Record 
Reference the documents and testimony in the record that support your 
arguments.   

Typed 
Typed briefs are preferred, but not required. If your brief is handwritten, 
please make sure that the handwriting is legible so that other people will be 
able to read your handwriting. 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Inclusion of All Arguments 
Please include all your arguments in your initial brief. Commission regulations 
do not provide for the submission of supplemental briefs. 

IX.  What Happens After You File Your Appeal and Brief? 

The Parties File Their Briefs 

If you file an appeal, the Agency may submit an opposition brief. At times, EEOC 
may request additional information or missing documents from the parties.   

The EEOC Office of Federal Operations Reads the Briefs, Reviews the Record, 
Performs Legal Research, and Issues a Decision 

An attorney in the EEOC Office of Federal Operations will be assigned to your 
appeal. The attorney will carefully review the record that was sent by the agency, read 
the briefs and understand the arguments raised in those briefs, perform legal research, 
and issue decisions.  

How Long Will It Take for EEOC to Issue a Decision on Appeal? 

Due to the volume of appeals, we cannot predict how quickly you will receive your 
decision on your appeal. Usually, the EEOC Office of Federal Operations issues a 
decision on a “procedural” appeals within 6-10 months after the filing of the appeal. 
A decision on a “merits” appeal, where a previous decision determined whether 
discrimination occurred, typically takes more time. 

If the case is complicated or there is disagreement on the outcome, it may take longer.  

How Can I Check the Status of My Appeal? 

If you are registered on the EEOC Public Portal (https://publicportal.eeoc.gov), you 
can check the status of your appeal on the Portal through your account. Telephone 
and email status inquiries simply provide the same information as is available on the 
Public Portal. 

What Can I Do If I Feel the EEOC’s Appellate Decision Made an Obvious 
Mistake? 

If you wish to dispute the appellate decision issued by the EEOC Office of Federal 
Operations, you may file a “request for reconsideration” with the EEOC. 

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
What Happens After the Administrative Appellate Process Is Over?  

o  EEOC Office of Federal Operations Decides In Your Favor 

If you prevailed on a “procedural” appeal, your complaint will most likely be 
sent back either to the agency or to an EEOC administrative judge for further 
proceedings, depending on where your complaint was in the EEO process 
before it was dismissed. A compliance officer in the EEOC Office of Federal 
Operations will monitor developments to make sure the Agency complies with 
the orders in the appellate decision. 

If you prevailed on a “merits” appeal, your complaint will most likely be sent 
back either to the agency or to an EEOC administrative judge to determine 
what type and amount of relief to award you. If you later disagree with the 
relief you received, you can appeal the relief ordered to the EEOC Office of 
Federal Operations. A compliance officer in the EEOC Office of Federal 
Operations will monitor developments to make sure the Agency complies with 
the orders in the appellate decision. 

o  EEOC Office of Federal Operations Decides in the Agency’s Favor 

If you did not prevail in your case, you may file a civil action in federal district 
court. The decision issued by the EEOC Office of Federal Operations will 
provide information on your right to file a civil action. 

However, the question of which federal district court may have personal and 
subject matter jurisdiction to hear your case is legal in nature, and the answer 
will depend on the specific circumstances surrounding your situation. 
Additionally, each federal district court may have its own specific rules and 
procedures and forms for filing civil actions, so you should contact the clerk of 
that district court to find out what you need to do to file a civil action. Because 
of these nuances, and because EEOC is an executive branch agency and the 
federal district courts are part of the judicial branch with its own procedures 
and legal rules, the EEOC Office of Federal Operations cannot provide 
complainants specific instructions in its appellate decisions for where or how 
to file civil actions.  

However, some of these resources may be helpful: 

  The US Department of Justice publishes a Civil Resource Manual, and 
one section talks about where civil actions can be brought against 
government officers and agencies: https://www.justice.gov/jm/civil-
resource-manual-41-venue-government-officers-and-agencies-
defendants 

16 

 
 
  The website for the United States Courts has an FAQ that answers 
some of the most common questions about filing a case in federal 
court: https://www.uscourts.gov/faqs-filing-case 

  The United States Courts website has a "federal court finder" where 

you can search for a federal court by location:  
https://www.uscourts.gov/federal-court-finder/search 

X.  Glossary of Terms 

Administrative Judge   An EEOC employee who independently decides discrimination complaints of federal 

Affidavit 

Affirm 

AJ 

Appeal 

Appellate 

Argument 

Attorney's fees  

Brief 

employees. An administrative judge will issue a variety of orders designed to ensure fair 
and expeditious processing of a complainant’s case, will analyze the applicable law and 
the evidence and issue a decision. 

A written statement that is signed under the penalty of perjury and sworn to before a 
person who is officially permitted by law to administer an oath. 

When the EEOC Office of Federal Operations says that a previous decision was right. 

An acronym for an EEOC Administrative Judge. 

A review by the EEOC Office of Federal Operations of what happened in a previous 
decision to determine if any mistakes happened and if the mistakes are significant enough 
to reverse or remand the decision. 

Having to do with appeals. 

Section of the brief that explains your side of the case. A brief in support of the appeal 
uses this section to show how the previous decision made a mistake in deciding the case. 
A brief in opposition to the appeal uses this section to respond to the opposing party’s 
arguments, and show why the previous decision is correct. 

If the complainant wins the appeal and is represented by an attorney, the EEOC Office of 
Federal Operations may order the losing federal agency to pay all or part of the attorney’s 
fees. 

A written statement that each side may give to the EEOC Office of Federal Operations 
that explains why the EEOC should decide that they are right. A brief presents a party’s 
arguments about the issues on appeal and cites to legal authorities (such as statutes, 
regulations, or case law) to support their positions. A brief in support of the appeal argues 
why the previous decision was an error or mistake; a brief in opposition to the appeal 
argues why the previous decision was correct. 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Case law  

Citation 

Civil Action 

Legal propositions that are based on administrative appellate and judicial decisions rather 
than on statutes. You can read published administrative appellate decisions at 
https://www.eeoc.gov/federal-sector/appellate-decisions. Particularly noteworthy 
administrative appellate decisions are listed at https://www.eeoc.gov/federal-
sector/selected-noteworthy-federal-sector-appellate-decisions. 

This term can have two meanings. First, it is a reference to a legal authority, such as a 
case that has already been decided by EEOC, a court, a statute, or the United States 
Constitution. Second, it is a reference to the record or the hearing transcript in the case. 

A noncriminal lawsuit that begins with a complaint. The plaintiff is the party filing the 
complaint, and the defendant is the party defending against the complaint’s allegations. 
The complaint describes the plaintiff’s damages or injury, explains how the defendant 
caused the harm, shows that the court has jurisdiction, and asks the court to order relief.   

Complaint File 

An electronic document assembled by an agency that includes all various documents and 
information acquired during fact-finding. The complaint file should include, when 
applicable: 

• 

• 
• 

• 

• 

• 

• 
• 

• 

• 
• 
• 

the EEO Counselor's report and all documents generated in the informal process, 
including the notice of right to file a complaint 
the formal EEO complaint and documents submitted by the complainant. 
the agency's notice of claims to be investigated; copies of any other documents 
bearing on delineation of the claims to be investigated; documents pertaining to the 
partial dismissal of claim(s) and/or the notice of late investigation 
documented attempts at resolution, including any settlement agreement reached on 
any aspect of the complaint; however, documentation should not include the 
substance of such attempts. 
any documentation of appellate activity and any decisions affecting the processing of 
the complaint if any 
the summary of investigation/summary analysis of the facts. The summary should 
cite to exhibits and evidence and be signed and dated by the investigator. 
the investigative evidence and documents. 
all pre-hearing submissions, including those relevant to summary judgment, and all 
discovery documentation, and motions, orders, exhibits, and transcripts. 
all submissions from an administrative hearing, including motions, exhibits, and 
transcripts. 
the decision(s) of the Commission's Administrative Judge. 
the Final Agency Action and any documentation related to service on the parties. 
any miscellaneous material. 

Compliance 

De novo 

An administrative process to make sure a federal agency complies with the orders of 
EEOC’s federal sector administrative appellate decisions. 

A standard of review used by the EEOC Office of Federal Operations when reviewing 
decisions or actions issued by other federal agencies. The EEOC Office of Federal 
Operations will consider the issues by taking a fresh look at the case and review the 
evidentiary documents, statements, and testimony of record, including any timely and 
relevant submissions of the parties. The Commission will issue its decision based on its 
own assessment of the record and its interpretation of the law. 

18 

 
 
 
Decision 

Deposition 

Discovery 

EEO 

Evidence 

Exhibit 

FAD 

File 

Final Action 

A judgment or order that settles a dispute and decides an issue. 

An out-of-court statement given under oath by any person involved in the case. 
Commonly used during the discovery process in preparation for a hearing. Depositions 
usually consist of an oral examination, followed by cross-examination by the opposing 
side. 

A process of exchanging information between the parties about the witnesses and 
evidence they will present at a hearing. One of the most common methods of discovery is 
to take depositions. A deposition is an out-of-court statement given under oath by any 
person involved in the case. It is to be used at a hearing or in preparation for a hearing. 

An acronym that stands for Equal Employment Opportunity 

Any proof legally presented during an investigation or an administrative hearing through 
witnesses, records, and exhibits. 

A paper, document, or other physical object received by an EEOC administrative judge 
as evidence during an administrative hearing. Or it can mean a document or an object 
shown and identified in an investigation or administrative hearing as evidence in a case. 

An acronym for Final Agency Decision. 

When a person officially gives a paper to a federal agency or the EEOC Office of Federal 
Operations and that paper becomes part of the record of a case. 

An agency final action involves agency issuance of a final order to the complainant. The 
final order informs the complainant whether the agency will fully implement the decision 
of an EEOC Administrative Judge and contains notice of the complainant's right to 
appeal to the Commission. The term “fully implement” means that the agency adopts 
without modification the decision of an EEOC Administrative Judge. If the agency's final 
order advises the complainant that the agency will not fully implement the decision of the 
Administrative Judge, the agency must file an appeal of the decision with the 
Commission simultaneously with issuing the final order to the complainant. In this way, 
an agency will take final action on a complaint referred to an Administrative Judge by 
issuing a final order, but it will not be provided with the opportunity of introducing new 
evidence or writing a new decision in the case. 

Final Agency Decision  A decision issued by an agency that either (1) dismisses an EEO complaint on procedural 

grounds, or (2) examines the evidence after completing an investigation and determines 
whether complainant was subjected to discrimination. 

Final Judgment 

Final decision by an EEOC Administrative Judge. This judgment resolves all of the 
issues that were presented in the administrative hearing. 

Final Order 

The final order informs the complainant whether an agency will fully implement the 
decision of an EEOC Administrative Judge and contains notice of the complainant's right 
to appeal to the Commission. The term “fully implement” means that the agency adopts 
without modification the decision of an EEOC Administrative Judge. If the agency's final 
order advises the complainant that the agency will not fully implement the decision of the 
Administrative Judge, the agency must file an appeal of the decision with the 
Commission simultaneously with issuing the final order to the complainant. 

Finding 

When a factfinder, such as a federal agency, an administrative judge, or the EEOC Office 
of Federal Operations, says something is a fact. 

19 

 
 
Formal Complaint 

Hearing 

A formal discrimination complaint that is filed with an agency’s EEO office. The formal 
complaint must be a signed statement from the complainant or the complainant's attorney, 
containing the complainant’s (or representative’s) telephone number and address, and 
must be sufficiently precise to identify the complainant and the agency, and describe 
generally the action or practice which forms the basis of the complaint. 

An administrative proceeding with an EEOC Administrative Judge and opposing sides 
present. The purpose of a hearing is to make a full and accurate record of the events a 
complainant raised in the EEO complaint. The EEOC Administrative Judge will then use 
this record to decide whether discrimination occurred. 

IF 

An acronym for Investigative File. 

Interrogatory 

Investigation 

A list of questions one party sends to another as part of the discovery process. The 
recipient must answer the questions under oath. 

An investigation of a formal complaint of discrimination is an official inquiry into claims 
raised in an EEO complaint. EEO investigations may include a variety of fact-finding 
methods such as interviews, a fact-finding conference, requests for information, 
interrogatories, and/or affidavits. 

Investigative File 

 A factual record assembled by an EEO investigator that will allow a fact finder to 
determine whether discrimination occurred. This record is sometimes also called a 
“Report of Investigation.”  The Investigative File should include: 

Lawyer 

Motion 

Notice of Appeal 

Oath 

Order 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

a summary of the investigation, 
informal counseling documents, 
the formal EEO complaint, 
all statements, affidavits, and declarations from the investigation, 
all documents submitted by the parties. 

A person licensed to practice law. Every state has a Bar Association, which can provide a 
lot of useful information about the lawyers in its state. Additionally, the National 
Employment Lawyers Association may have members who can help complainants. 

The document a party files to ask an EEOC Administrative Judge to do something or to 
permit one of the parties to do something. Typically, one party files a motion. Then the 
opposing party files an opposition. After reviewing both, the EEOC administrative judge 
will make a decision on the motion. 

A document filed in the EEOC Office of Federal Operations that states you are appealing 
the previous decision. This document starts the appeal. Complainants should use EEOC 
Form 573, Notice of Appeal/Petition, available at https://www.eeoc.gov/federal-
sector/management-directive/notice-appealpetition-complainant. Federal agencies must 
attach copies of EEOC Form 573 to all final actions and dismissals of equal employment 
complaints. 

All people must swear or affirm to tell the truth if they want their statement or testimony 
to be considered as evidence. All written statements must be submitted as affidavits to be 
considered as evidence. 

A written or oral decision by an EEOC administrative judge, federal agency, or EEOC 
Office of Federal Operations that resolves a matter and/or directs the parties to do 
something. 

20 

 
Party 

Precedent 

Preponderance of  
evidence  

The technical legal word for the people who are part of a legal case and have a right to 
ask the EEOC Office of Federal Operations to make a decision on a dispute. 

A published administrative appellate or court decision in an earlier case with facts and 
legal issues similar to the dispute currently before the EEOC Office of Federal 
Operations. The EEOC Office of Federal Operations will generally “follow precedent,” 
meaning that it uses the principles established in earlier cases to decide new cases dealing 
with similar facts and legal issues. The EEOC Office of Federal Operations will overlook 
precedent if a party can show that the earlier case was decided incorrectly or that it 
differed in some significant way from the current case. 

A type of evidentiary standard. Under this standard, a complainant satisfies the burden of  
proof by offering evidence that demonstrates their claim of employment discrimination 
has a greater than 50% chance to be true. In other words, if a complainant can convince a 
fact finder that discrimination more likely than not occurred, the complainant meets his or 
her burden of proof. 

Prevailing party 

The party that wins the case. 

Pro se 

Public Portal 

Record 

Remand 

Latin for “for oneself, on one’s own behalf.” A pro se complainant is a person who does 
not have an attorney and is representing himself or herself in a case.  

The Public Portal is EEOC’s secure, web-based application that allows individuals with 
discrimination complaints against the federal government to submit and receive 
documents supporting their appeal. 

All of the paperwork filed in the EEO process, which the EEOC Office of Federal 
Operations will review in the appeal. This usually includes the report of investigation, 
exhibits, the hearing transcript, motions, orders, and the final decision or action from the 
case. 

When the EEOC Office of Federal Operations sends an EEO complaint back to a federal 
agency or EEOC administrative judge for further proceedings. 

Report of Investigation  A factual record assembled by an EEO investigator that will allow a fact finder to 

determine whether discrimination occurred. This record is sometimes also called an 
“Investigative File.”  The Report of Investigation should include: 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

a summary of the investigation, 
informal counseling documents, 
the formal EEO complaint, 
all statements, affidavits, and declarations from the investigation, 
all documents submitted by the parties. 

Reverse 

When the EEOC Office of Federal Operations sets aside the previous decision. A reversal 
may be accompanied by a remand to the federal agency or an EEOC administrative judge 
for further proceedings. 

ROI 

An acronym for Report of Investigation. 

Standard of review 

The standard of review is how much weight (or deference) the EEOC Office of Federal 
Operations gives to the previous decision when reviewing that decision on appeal. There 
are different standards of review for different kinds of decisions.  

Statute 

A law passed by the U.S. Congress. 

21 

 
 
Substantial evidence 

A standard of review in which the Commission will give deference to an administrative 
judge's post-hearing factual findings based on evidence in the record.  

Summary judgment 

For example, an administrative judge finds a management witness’ testimony credible 
based on the demeanor or tone of voice during the hearing. The Commission will accept 
the administrative judge’s credibility determination, unless documents or other objective 
evidence so contradicts the testimony of the witness or the testimony of the witness 
otherwise so lacks in credibility that a reasonable fact finder would not credit it. 

Summary judgment (also known as a decision without a hearing) is a judgment entered 
by an EEOC Administrative Judge for one party and against another party without a full 
hearing. Summary judgment indicates there is sufficient evidence to declare one party the 
clear winner.  

In other words, an EEOC Administrative Judge has reviewed the undisputed facts of the 
case, along with any acceptable evidence provided by each party to support their 
argument, and sees no point in having an administrative hearing. The EEOC 
Administrative Judge will then rule on the case based on the facts and evidence. 

Testimony 

Transcript 

The words spoken during an administrative hearing by witnesses that is evidence. 

Written version of everything that was said by the parties, the EEOC administrative 
judge, and any witnesses at the administrative hearing.  

U.S. Supreme Court 

Located in Washington, D.C., it is the highest court in the United States; the U.S. 
Supreme Court has final appellate jurisdiction and has jurisdiction over all other courts in 
the nation. 

Witness 

A person called by a party to speak under oath about what he or she knows or has 
observed that is relevant to the case. There are no witnesses used in appeals. 

22 

 
Attachment I-Sample Brief for a Procedural Dismissal 

EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION 

OFFICE OF FEDERAL OPERATIONS  

Julie Smith, Complainant 

v. 

U.S. Dept. of XYZ, Agency 

Complainant’s Brief 

From Julie Smith 

123 ABC Way 

Garden City, NY 11530 

EEOC Appeal No. 202100XXXX 

Agency Case No. ABC-123-XYZ 

 
 
 
 
 
Attachment I-Sample Brief for a Procedural Dismissal 

PROCEDURAL HISTORY/BACKGROUND 

In 2003, Complainant was hired by the Agency to work as an Administrative Assistant in its New 

York, NY office.  Complainant received a Notice of Termination effective April 1, 2021.  (Complaint 

File at 8).  On April 5, 2021, Complainant contacted an EEO Counselor about her termination.  At 

the  end  of  EEO  counseling,  the  Agency  sent  her  a  Notice  of  Right  to  File  a  Formal  Complaint 

(Notice).  On May 3, 2021, Complainant received the Notice by certified U.S. mail. (Complaint File 

at 21). On May 17, 2021, Complainant filed her formal complaint with the Agency by email and 

alleged that she was terminated based on age.  (Complaint File at 25).  On July 1, 2021, the Agency 

issued a final decision dismissing Complainant’s complaint on the grounds her formal complaint 

was not timely filed. (Complaint File at 40).  On July 15, 2021, Complainant appealed the matter 

to OFO via the EEOC Public Portal.  This brief was filed with OFO on July 26, 2021.   

ARGUMENT 

I. 

The Final Decision made a mistake in finding that Complainant’s formal complaint 

was filed on May 20, 2021.   

EEOC  Regulation  29  C.F.R.  §  1614.106(b)  requires  the  filing  of  a  written  complaint  with  an 

appropriate agency official within fifteen (15) calendar days after receipt of the notice of the right 

to file a formal complaint.   

Complainant received the Notice by U. S. certified mail on May 3, 2021. (Complaint File at 21).  

The Notice informed her to file her formal complaint with the Agency within 15 days of receipt. 

(Complaint File at 21).   In its final decision, the Agency found that Complainant filed her formal 

complaint on May 20, 2021 via U.S. mail (postmark date), outside the 15-day time period.  

2 

 
 
Attachment I-Sample Brief for a Procedural Dismissal 

(Complaint File at 40.).  However, the record shows that Complainant first filed her formal 

complaint with the Agency by email on May 17, 2021.  (Complaint File at 25).  Complainant later  

mailed a copy of her formal complaint to the Agency on May 20, 2021.  (Complaint File at 30).  

For these reasons, Complainant timely filed her formal complaint on May 17, 2021 via email, 

within 15 days of receiving the Notice on May 3, 2021.   

CONCLUSION   

For  these  reasons,  OFO  should  REVERSE  the  Agency’s  final  decision  dismissing  Complainant’s 

complaint and REMAND this matter to the Agency for investigation. 

3 

 
 
 
Attachment I-Sample Brief for a Procedural Dismissal 

CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE 

I certify that on July 26, 2021, this brief was filed with the EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations 
and served on the Agency, U.S. Dept. of XYZ, via the EEOC Public Portal.   

Julie Smith 

4 

 
 
 
 
Attachment II-Sample Brief for a Merits Decision 

U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION 

OFFICE OF FEDERAL OPERATIONS  

Jane Doe 

Complainant, 

vs. 

U.S. Dept. of XYZ (Sub-agency) 

Agency. 

____________________ 

) 

) 

) 

) 

) 

)  

) 

) 

EEOC Appeal No. 202100ZZZZ 

EEOC Hearing No. (if applicable): N/A 

Agency Case No. 123-ABC-XXX 

Check which brief this is: 

☒   BRIEF IN SUPPORT OF APPEAL 

☐  BRIEF IN OPPOSITION TO APPEAL 

Your Name:   

Jane Doe 

Address:  

123 Anywhere Lane 

Anytown, MD XXXXX 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Attachment II-Sample Brief for a Merits Decision 

BACKGROUND INFORMATION ON DISCRIMINATORY ACTIONS; 
PROCEDURAL HISTORY OF EEO COMPLAINT 

Please explain in chronological order the discriminatory events that happened which caused 
you to file an EEO complaint. List only the specific facts connected to the issues on appeal. 
You may also describe the relevant procedural history of the EEO complaint.  

The EEOC Office of Federal Operations will generally only consider information that was 
provided during the investigation or during the hearing process. This means now you cannot 
include new facts or evidence that was not presented earlier. The only exception is if you can 
show that the evidence was not reasonably available prior to or during the investigation or 
during the hearing process.  

If you can, you should include the specific page or pages in the record where that fact can be 
found. (After stating a fact, please give the page in the record supporting that fact by using: 
“Complaint File at page #” or “Report of Investigation at page #”). 

In 2017, Complainant began working at the Agency’s Washington, D.C. facility as 

a GS-7 Financial Analyst. In 2021, she applied and interviewed for a GS-9 Financial 

Analyst position under Vacancy Announcement No. XXXX. On March 1, 2021, she 

learned that the Agency had selected a male applicant instead of her (Complaint File at 

13).    

On March 12, 2021, Complainant contacted an EEO Counselor to start the EEO 

process because she was not chosen for the job. (Complaint File at 15). On April 12, 

2021, Complainant filed a formal EEO complaint, alleging that she was discriminated 

because of her sex when she was not selected for the Financial Analyst-GS-9 position.  

(Complaint File at 23-25). On June 20, 2021, the Agency sent Complainant a copy of the 

Report of Investigation (ROI) and notice of her right to elect a final agency decision or a 

2 

 
 
 
 
Attachment II-Sample Brief for a Merits Decision 

hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge. Complainant requested a final decision. 

(Complaint File at 40).   

On August 20, 2021, the Agency issued a final decision, finding no discrimination.  

(Complaint File at 45). The final decision determined that the Agency articulated a 

legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for hiring the male selectee over Complainant in 

that the selectee’s responses during the interview were more thorough and more detailed 

than Complainant’s responses. The final decision then determined that Complainant 

failed to prove that the Agency’s articulated reason was a pretext for discrimination. 

On August 28, 2021, Complainant appealed the matter to EEOC using the EEOC 

Public Portal.  (Complainant File at 60). This brief is timely filed on September 15, 2021. 

STANDARD OF REVIEW 

When the EEOC Office of Federal Operations reviews an issue on appeal, it needs some kind 
of rules or guidelines to determine whether the Agency or administrative judge has made an 
error. Different kinds of rulings require different kinds of review guidelines. These guidelines 
are called standards of review. 

When an appealing party argues that the previous decision made a mistake, the EEOC Office 
of Federal Operations looks first at what the standard of review is for that particular issue. 
The three most common standards of review are: de novo review, substantial evidence, and 
clearly erroneous. A detailed discussion about the various standards of review on appeal can 
be found in Chapter 9, section VI of EEOC Management Directive 110, at 
https://www.eeoc.gov/federal-sector/management-directive/chapter-9-appeals-commission 

It may be difficult for people representing themselves to determine the appropriate standard 
of review. If you are not able to figure this out, you can skip this section. 

What is being appealed? 

☐ Procedural final agency decision → Use de novo review 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
Attachment II-Sample Brief for a Merits Decision 

A procedural final agency decision is a decision issued by a federal agency that dismisses an EEO 
claim or complaint on procedural grounds, such as failing to state a valid claim of discrimination, 
untimely contacting an EEO counselor, or untimely filing the EEO complaint. The standard of 
review to use on appeal is de novo review. 

☒ Final agency decision on the merits → Use de novo review 

A final agency decision on the merits is a decision issued by a federal agency after it has 
conducted an investigation. The final decision examines the evidence gathered from the 
investigation and determines whether complainant was subjected to employment discrimination. 
The standard of review to use on appeal is de novo review. 

☐ Summary judgment decision (decision without a hearing by an administrative judge) → 
Use de novo review 

A summary judgment decision is issued by an EEOC administrative judge who decides in favor of 
one party without a full hearing. The standard of review to use on appeal is de novo review. 

☐ Decision by an EEOC administrative judge after a hearing → Use substantial evidence  
   standard for factual findings, and de novo review for legal determinations 

The Commission will give deference to an administrative judge's post-hearing factual findings 
based on evidence in the record. For example, say an administrative judge finds a management 
witness’ testimony credible based on the demeanor or tone of voice during the hearing. The 
Commission will accept the administrative judge’s credibility determination, unless documents or 
other objective evidence so contradicts the testimony of the witness or the testimony of the witness 
otherwise so lacks in credibility that a reasonable fact finder would not credit it. 

The Commission will review legal determinations made by an administrative judge or agency 
without presuming that the previous decision-maker was correct in interpreting or applying the 
law. 

☐ Previous administrative appellate decision by the EEOC Office of Federal Operations →  
   Use clearly erroneous standard  

A party may request that the EEOC Office of Federal Operations reconsider one of its initial 
decision. The Commission may reconsider a previous decision if a party demonstrates that the 
earlier appellate decision involved a clearly erroneous interpretation of material fact or law. In 
other words, did the previous decision make a clear, obvious error that affected the outcome of the 
appeal? 

For example, the EEOC Office of Federal Operations issued an initial decision, agreeing with a 
federal agency to dismiss complainant’s appeal because it was untimely filed based on the date of 
an email complainant sent to the Commission. Complainant requests that the Commission 
reconsider its initial decision, because the initial decision made an obvious mistake by not using 
the earlier postmark date when she mailed her appeal. 

☐ Other (please specify): 

☐ Not sure 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
Attachment II-Sample Brief for a Merits Decision 

Final agency decisions on the merits of individual complaints shall be reviewed de 

novo. The de novo standard of review requires that the Commission will examine the 

record without regard to the factual and legal determinations of the previous decision. 

The Commission will review the documents, statements, and testimony of record, 

including any timely and relevant submissions of the parties, and the Commission will 

issue its decision based on the Commission's own assessment of the record and its 

interpretation of the law. 

THE LAW THAT SHOULD BE APPLIED 

If you believe that the previous decision applied the wrong law to your case, tell the EEOC 
Office of Federal Operations what law it should apply to decide your appeal. Legal 
authorities may include EEOC regulations, laws passed by the U.S. Congress, judicial 
decisions, especially those issued by the U.S. Supreme Court, and EEOC federal sector 
administrative appellate decisions. It may be difficult for people representing themselves to 
determine the appropriate law. If you are not able to figure this out, you can skip this section. 

Do you think the previous decision applied the wrong law? ☐ YES  

    ☒ NO 

☐ NOT SURE 

A claim alleging disparate treatment is examined under the three-part test set forth 

in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). Under this analysis, a 

complainant initially must establish a prima facie case of discrimination by presenting 

facts that, if unexplained, reasonably give rise to an inference of discrimination (that a 

prohibited consideration was a factor in the adverse employment action). McDonnell 

Douglas 411 U.S. at 802.  

Next, in response, the agency management witnesses must state a legitimate, non-

discriminatory reason for the challenged actions. McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802.  

5 

 
 
 
Attachment II-Sample Brief for a Merits Decision 

Finally, complainant must demonstrate that the agency's action was more likely 

than not based on prohibited considerations of discrimination. To do so, complainant 

must show that the agency’s reasons for its action were not its true reasons but a sham or 

pretext to try to mask discrimination.  See McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 804.  

In a non-selection case like this, a complainant may show that an employer’s 

reason for the non-selection was pretext for discrimination by demonstrating that her 

qualifications were “plainly superior” to those of the selectee.  Wasser v. Dept. of Labor, 

EEOC Request No. 05940058 (Nov. 2, 1995). 

ARGUMENTS ON APPEAL 

If you are the appealing party, tell the EEOC Office of Federal Operations why the previous 
decision was wrong. For example, did the previous decision incorrectly decide the facts? If 
so, what facts? If you can, you should include the specific page or pages in the record where 
that fact can be found. (After stating a fact, please cite to the page in the record by using: 
“Complaint File at page #”; “Report of Investigation at page #”; “Exhibit A at page #”). 
This allows the EEOC Office of Federal Operations to understand whether a factual 
assertion is accurate. If you do not provide supporting cites for factual statements, it is 
harder for the EEOC Office of Federal Operations to fairly consider the factual arguments 
you raise. 

If you think the previous decision applied the wrong law, how should the case be decided if 
the EEOC applied the right law? Do you feel that there are other reasons why the previous 
decision was wrong? If so, what are they?  

If you are the party opposing the appeal, explain why the previous decision was correct. 

Did the previous decision incorrectly decide the facts?         ☒ YES  

    ☐ NO 

Do you think the previous decision applied the wrong law? ☐ YES  

    ☒ NO 

☐ NOT SURE 

Do you feel there are any other reasons why the previous decision was wrong? ☐ YES     ☒ NO 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Attachment II-Sample Brief for a Merits Decision 

I. 

Complainant established a prima facie case of sex discrimination. 

Complainant has established a prima facie case of sex discrimination.  

Complainant applied for the position in question and was found qualified for the position.  

Report of Investigation (ROI) at 45-46. However, another applicant was chosen for the 

position. Unlike Complainant, the applicant chosen was male.  (ROI at 48).   

II. 

Although the Agency articulated a non-discriminatory reason for its actions, 
other evidence demonstrate that this articulated reason was more likely than 
not a pretext for sex discrimination. 

a.  The interview panel’s notes show that Complainant gave more thorough 

and detailed answers than the selectee. 

The selecting official and other members of the interview panel stated, in their 

affidavits, that they hired the selectee because his responses during the interview were 

more thorough and more detailed than Complainant’s responses.  (ROI at 100, paragraph 

4; 111, paragraph 3).  

However, this testimony is contradicted by other evidence. The Report of 

Investigation contains copies of the interview notes from the members of the interview 

panel. The notes indicate that Complainant’s responses were more detailed and thorough 

than the selectee’s responses. (ROI at 115-119). For example, Complainant’s interview 

responses generally contained multiple detailed examples for each of the Agency’s skills-

based questions. (ROI at 115-117). The selectee’s responses, however, generally 

contained only one example for each question with little detail. (ROI at 118-119). 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Attachment II-Sample Brief for a Merits Decision 

Therefore, the interview notes show that the Agency’s articulated reason for hiring the 

selectee was not its true reason but a sham or pretext to try to mask sex discrimination.   

b.  Complainant’s  qualifications  were  plainly  superior  to  the  selectee’s 

qualifications. 

Complainant’s qualifications were plainly superior to the selectee’s qualifications.  

For example, the record reflects that Complainant served in a year-long detail to the 

Financial Analyst, GS-9 position and performed all of the functions of this position.  

(ROI at 124). In addition, the record reflects that Complainant received an “Outstanding” 

performance evaluation while detailed to the Financial Analyst, GS-9 position.  (ROI at 

130-135). There is no evidence in the record showing that the selectee served in a detail 

to the position in question. Therefore, there is no valid, non-discriminatory explanation 

for why Complainant was not chosen for the job. Based on the evidence, Complainant 

has established that the Agency’s articulated reason for not picking her was more likely 

than not a pretext for sex discrimination. 

ACTIONS THAT EEOC SHOULD TAKE IN THIS APPEAL 

For the reasons stated above, the Commission should:  

☒ reverse or change the previous decision.   

☐ affirm or keep the previous decision. 

☐ other:                                

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Attachment II-Sample Brief for a Merits Decision 

If the Commission finds in favor of Complainant, the Commission should grant 

Complainant the following relief:  

☒ Compensatory damages 

Payment to victims of discrimination for out-of-pocket expenses caused by the 
discrimination (such as costs associated with a job search or medical expenses) and to 
compensate them for any emotional harm suffered (such as mental anguish, 
inconvenience, or loss of enjoyment of life). 

☒ Retroactive placement in a job (please specify): Financial Analyst, GS-9 position  

For cases in which the employee or applicant is not selected for a position or promotion 
due to discrimination, this would include an offer of placement into the position sought, 
or a substantially equivalent position within the same commuting area. The offer should 
be made retroactive to the date of the selection in question 

In cases involving a discriminatory termination, the agency should offer to reinstate the 
complainant to his or her former position retroactive to the date of the termination. 

☐ Front Pay 

Front pay compensates an individual when reinstatement is not possible in certain limited 
circumstances. Front pay may be awarded in lieu of reinstatement when: (1) no position 
is available; (2) a subsequent working relationship between the parties would be 
antagonistic; or (3) the employer has a record of long-term resistance to anti-
discrimination efforts. 

☐ Back Pay 

The purpose of a back pay award is to restore to the complainant the income he or she 
would have otherwise earned but for the discrimination. The most common 
discriminatory actions generating back pay are: removals, suspensions, denials of 
promotions, and failure to hire. 

☐ Liquidated Damages 

Liquidated damages are generally monetary awards equal to, and in addition to, the back 
pay due to the complainant. Such damages may be available for a violation of the Equal 
Pay Act.  

☐ Restoration of Leave 

Where there has been a finding of discrimination, the complainant is entitled to the 
restoration of any leave used because of the agency's discriminatory actions. 

☐ Cancel an unwarranted personnel action and restore the employee to the status he or she   
     occupied prior to the discrimination (please specify): 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Attachment II-Sample Brief for a Merits Decision 

An example is canceling a discriminatory termination of complainant and restoring 
complainant to his or her previous position. 

☐ Expunge adverse materials relating to the discriminatory employment practice from the  
     agency's records (please specify): 

An example is expunging a discriminatory disciplinary action from complainant’s 
personnel records. 

☐ Provide complainant with a full opportunity to participate in the employee benefit that  
     was denied (please specify): 

Examples of employee benefits include training, preferential work assignments, or 
overtime scheduling. 

☐ Raise a performance rating (please specify): 

When the finding of discrimination involves a performance appraisal, the appropriate 
relief should include raising the rating to that which the individual would have received 
absent the discrimination. 

☐ Awards of costs and fees for attorney, expert, or non-legal services 

Complainants who prevail on claims alleging discrimination in violation of Title VII of 
the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended and the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as 
amended, are presumptively entitled to an award of attorney’s fees and costs. A 
prevailing complainant is entitled to recovery of his/her costs.  

Complainants prevailing on claims under the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 
1967, as amended, and the Equal Pay Act of 1963, as amended, are not entitled to 
attorney’s fees at the administrative level. 

A prevailing complainant is entitled to recovery of his or her costs. Costs include: witness 
fees; transcript costs; and printing and copying costs.  

A prevailing complainant is entitled to compensation for the work of law clerks, 
paralegals, and law students under the supervision of members of the bar, at market rates, 
but not for clerical services. 

Reasonable costs incurred directly by a prevailing complainant (for example, one who is 
unrepresented or who is represented by a non-lawyer) are compensable. Costs must be 
proved in the same manner as fees are, and the complainant must provide documentation, 
such as bills or receipts. 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Attachment II-Sample Brief for a Merits Decision 

CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE 

I certify that on September 15, 2021, this brief was filed with the EEOC’s Office of Federal 
Operations and served on the Agency, U.S. Dept. of XYZ, via the EEOC Public Portal.   

Jane Doe 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
