TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE FOR FEDERAL AGENCIES  
IN USING THE 2006-2010 AMERICAN COMMUNITY SURVEY  
EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY TABULATION  

Introduction 

This document is intended to assist federal agency officials who prepare and submit 
reports pursuant to EEO Management Directive 715 (MD-715).  As will be described in 
more detail below, beginning with their Fiscal Year (FY) 2013 MD-715 reports, 
agencies will use the 2006-2010 American Community Survey Equal Employment 
Opportunity Tabulation (EEO Tabulation), which the U.S. Census Bureau (Census) 
released on November 29, 2012. 

This document will serve two purposes.  First, it will alert EEO Tabulation users to the 
major changes concerning each agency’s data and how it should be formatted for MD-
715 reporting.  It also will highlight the differences between the EEO Tabulation and 
the 2000 Census decennial Data Tool, each of which was designed to provide external 
benchmarks to assist federal agencies in monitoring employment practices and 
enforcing workforce civil rights laws.  Second, after identifying and describing those 
tables designed for federal agency use, the document lists those elements of the EEO 
Tabulation that should not be used for MD-715 purposes, and explains the reasons.   

Background 

Over the past decade, the Office of Personnel Management (OPM): (1) created new 
occupational families and the specific occupations within those families; and (2) 
revised certain occupations within existing families.  OPM has also deleted entire 
occupational families (and all the occupations within them), along with certain 
occupations in remaining families. 

During this same time period, Census revised the way it collects the socio-economic 
data underlying the decennial reporting cycle behind EEO files covering 1970, 1980, 
1990 and 2000.  It eliminated the decennial “long form” and replaced it with an 
ongoing American Community Survey (ACS), which asks the same questions of fewer 
people each year rather than asking more people less frequently.  Also, at the request 
of EEOC and other federal agencies responsible for EEO monitoring of the nation’s 
civilian labor force (“CLF”), Census created the above-referenced EEO Tabulation 
based upon ACS data.  It can be accessed utilizing Census’s American FactFinder (AFF) 
on-line tool at http://www.census.gov/people/eeotabulation. 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Using the EEO Tabulation 

As noted above, beginning in FY 2013, covered agencies will prepare their MD-715 
reports using the EEO Tabulation.  In addition to preparing the workforce data tables, 
agencies, after consulting with EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (OFO), Federal 
Sector Programs (FSP), may conduct additional, more refined workforce analyses 
using the EEO Tabulation to sort employees into both EEOC’s nine federal EEO 
occupational groups (“FedSec9") and the agency’s major occupations.  
http://www.census.gov/people/eeotabulation.  

Understanding the Tables 

The EEO Tabulation contains fourteen Table Sets, which are tables related by content 
that filter data into specific categories.  Federal agency users should concentrate on 
Table Sets 2 and 5 only, which are explained in more detail below. To access the AFF, 
see 
http://www.census.gov/people/eeotabulation/data/eeotables20062010.html. 

The information contained in Table Sets 2 and 5 are similar, except in one respect.  
Table Set 2 applies to major occupations that exemplify an agency’s mission and role 
within the federal government; the particular occupations can vary accordingly. Table 
Set 5 pre-sorts all federal jobs into one of nine (FedSec9) aggregations of occupations 
having similar skill levels, training, mobility, and other labor market characteristics. 

All individual federal occupations are provided on a separate table, which contains 
the Census equivalent to each federal occupation.  That table, EEOC Federal Sector 
Occupational Cross-Classification Table (“Crosswalk”), can be accessed at 
http://www.eeoc.gov/federal/directives/00-09opmcode.cfm.  For each occupation 
listed, the Crosswalk shows (1) the OPM occupation code and title, (2) the FedSec9 
occupational category to which that job is assigned, (3) the external Census title and 
code, and (4) the Office of Management and Budget (“OMB”) Standard Occupational 
Code (“SOC”). 

For federal agency users, the similarities between Table Sets 2 and 5 are illustrated in 
more detail below. Each is divided into three subsets, sorted on the basis of United 
States citizenship (which is important because most federal jobs are limited to 
citizens). 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The tables are designated either:  

Table Set 2 - EEO-ALL02R, EEO-CIT02R, EEO-NCIT02R, EEO-ALL02W, EEO-CIT02W, and 
EEO-NCIT02W;  

or  

Table Set 5 - EEO-ALL05R, EEO-CIT05R, EEO-NCIT05R, EEO-ALL05W, EEO-CIT05W, and 
EEO-NCIT05W. 

After the prefix “EEO”, which applies to the entire set of tabulations, each set is 
sorted by three additional categories: 

1. 

2. 

3. 

The letter designation “ALL” covers all members of the CLF 
enumerated in that table set.  The letter designations “CIT” and 
“NCIT” sort the observations on the basis of citizenship status, 
between citizens and non-citizens. 

The numerical designations “02" or “05" tie the information to its 
particular table set, individual or FedSec9. 

The letter designations “R” and “W” sort the observations on the 
basis of each worker’s residence location or worksite location.   

The R and W designations relate to the labor market geography for each worker.  
Depending on which table is used, the external benchmark of non-federal workers 
employed in equivalent occupations can vary.  On that basis, EEOC regards the 
selection of a labor market area for MD-715 reporting purposes to be a critical 
element of each agency’s reporting protocol.  This is covered in more detail below. 

The tables in both Table Sets 2 and 5 adhere to OMB’s uniform geographic boundary 
specifications, known as the Federal Information Processing System (FIPS) codes.  
Agencies can select levels of geographic specificity that reflect its employment 
practices, its size, and the breadth of its workforce distribution, in terms of total 
numbers, as well as the location of designated activities or organizational 
subcomponents. 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Defining the Geography 

In the past, some agencies have defaulted to nationwide data to avoid complex and 
detailed comparisons, and to reflect the presence in all or many states of agency 
staff.  The EEO Tabulation permits, when appropriate, labor markets below the 
nationwide level, especially when recruitment and hiring is done on a more localized 
basis and/or where applicant tracking data shows that persons applied only from a 
specific geographic area. 

For EEO comparisons and MD-715 reporting purposes, agencies are instructed to use 
the Worksite (W) tables when benchmarking within specific geographic locations.  
Worksite tables reflect the distribution of jobs in a particular area on the basis of 
where employer facilities are located and the work is actually performed, both in the 
federal and private sectors.  Where recruitment and hiring is done at the national 
level, agencies should use the Residence (R) tables.  Thus, the fact that some 
agencies previously used Residence-based data because of problems obtaining 
comparable Worksite information, no longer constitutes a valid basis to do so, 
beginning with the FY 2013 reporting cycle, other than when dealing with U.S. totals 
and nationwide labor markets.  

Even at the FedSec9 level of occupational aggregation shown in Table Set 5, it is less 
likely that an agency should use the nationwide option for all of its occupational 
categories.  However, the nationwide (R tables) are appropriate when the agency: 
employs large numbers of workers in most states; benchmarks against Officials and 
Managers, and the Professional workers categories, (because these categories are 
often recruited nationally); or the category constitutes a substantial segment of that 
agency’s workforce.  Otherwise, availability can be calculated using an agency’s own 
regional structure and then aggregated into a weighted average, or some other 
intermediate configuration.  

A third, more local option can reflect the more localized labor markets that generally 
apply to blue-collar wage grade (“WG”) workers, as well as technical, administrative 
support, and service workers in the general schedule (“GS”) ranks.  As with all aspects 
of this Guidance, technical assistance is available from EEOC’s OFO/FSP staff, contact 
information provided on the last page of this document. 

A few additional factors should be kept in mind when working with the EEO 
Tabulation.  After selecting the appropriate table from the options described above, 
the next step is to specify the geographic level that will be used (before going to the 
next step of identifying the particular major occupation(s) or the FedSec9 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
occupational aggregations).  For MD-715 purposes, the range of geographic levels is: 
nationwide, agency region (FIPS), state, or county of 50,000 people or more.  Beyond 
those options, the most refined level (using Census terminology) is Place, which refers 
to cities, towns, or other places of 50,000 or more persons. 

The importance of Place, when combined with the W, Worksite option, is three-fold. 
First, because the distribution of residential patterns in terms of race or national 
origin (“RNO”) sometimes differs from the distribution of available work in the same 
labor market area, benchmark availability estimates often vary between the two.  
The EEO Tabulation automatically takes into account both those who live and work in 
a particular location, and those who commute to jobs in that specific location but live 
elsewhere.  

Second, the Worksite tables have a sub-option that lists the locations from which 
people commute and provides the total commute flow.  For each Worksite, this option 
identifies up to nine specific in-commutes, plus a residual composed of all individuals 
not otherwise coming from one of those locations. While MD-715 does not require 
commute-pattern information, such detail helps clarify anomalies that are revealed 
by analysis at that level.  For example, an agency may find that a low participation 
rate for a RNO group could result from a lack of hiring from one specific contributing 
flow which contains a significant number of workers from that RNO group.  Agencies 
are encouraged to use this approach with several of their most populous major 
occupations in the event that low participation rates or other anomalies are present 
and affect employment by RNO or sex. 

Third, the accuracy of external availability estimates is increased when facilities are 
located in large counties, where there may be a multiple number of places that 
reflect worksite and commute flows within that larger geographic pattern.  Los 
Angeles County, California, illustrates this point.  

The absence of detailed occupational data for geographic areas of less than 50,000 
persons on the EEO Tabulation is because of Census Bureau’s confidentiality 
standards, which prohibit repeated cross-tabulations that could reveal the identity of 
specific individuals in Table Set 2.  Because occupations in Table Set 5 are already 
aggregated into only nine categories, the geographic limit increases to areas of fewer 
than 100,000 when analyses are done at the FedSec9 level. 

As specified above, agencies may only use Table Sets 2 and 5 for MD-715 analysis and 
reporting purposes.  To understand more fully why other Table Sets should not be 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
used, agency EEO and Human Resources (“HR”) officials may be aided by the 
following information: 

Whereas Table Set 1 contains much of the data that is found in Table Set 
2, it does not sort on the basis of citizenship status.  Table Set 1 is thus 
suited for private sector employer comparisons, but not for the federal 
sector. 

Table Set 1 also contains some occupations that are populated only in 
the private sector but not in federal employment.  Table Set 2 only 
covers occupations listed with a Census title and code and a SOC code, 
and that have federal counterparts.  Furthermore, because OPM 
currently lists 681 individual GS and WG occupations, but the EEO 
Tabulation contains only 487 occupations, some federal jobs must be 
compared to the same external availability standard. 

Table Sets 3, 4 and 6 cover non-federal employment at aggregated 
occupational level.  Table Set 4 sorts the 487 Census occupations into 
the nine private sector categories used by EEOC’s EEO-1 annual report 
form, while Table Set 3 conforms to a fourteen category alternative 
EEOC format. Similarly, Table Set 6 is used by the Department of Justice 
to compare state and local government employment to external 
availability for public jobs below the federal level, as covered by the 
EEO-4 survey.  

Table Sets 7 through 14 contain occupational information sorted on the 
basis of age, income levels, industry, and educational attainment. 
Although EEOC has jurisdiction over the Age Discrimination in 
Employment Act, age is not a component of MD-715’s affirmative 
employment requirements.  The other variables enumerated above 
affect non-federal employment, especially in the private sector, but do 
not result in similar differences based on RNO or sex in the analysis of 
the federal workforce. 

One additional limitation should be noted.  While both Table Sets 2 and 5 include 
geographic options for Census-defined “Metro” or “Micro” Statistical Areas, they are 
not part of the labor market alternative set recognized for MD-715 reporting because 
of methodological limitations that can result in substantial inaccuracy.  Several issues 
contribute to this problem.  These include the assumption that availability by RNO 
status is uniformly distributed throughout the entire Area, as it would need to be for 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
the estimate to be valid, and the issue of Areas composed of several counties where 
the worksite versus residence differences, along with the differential in- and out-
commute patterns encountered across Metro Area boundaries, distort availability 
estimates by RNO and sex. 

Selecting the Occupation 

After defining the geography, agencies must identify its major occupations for 
benchmarking.  The Crosswalk referred to earlier in this Guidance was updated in 
January, 2013, and provides the appropriate Census occupation code for each federal 
occupation.  When utilizing the Census AFF tool, agencies will use the Census code 
identified by the Crosswalk to conduct its workforce benchmarking.  

EEOC will amend the Crosswalk whenever OPM adds, deletes or modifies an 
occupational series.  It is possible that an agency’s current occupational distribution, 
using OPM GS and WG codes and titles, may include instances where a specific series 
is no longer active.  Technical assistance concerning occupational cross-classification 
or the Crosswalk can be obtained from staff within EEOC’s Office of Federal 
Operations. 

Additional Information 

Aggregation and Allocation 

The EEO Tab tables follow a uniform format in displaying race and ethnicity data.  For 
MD-715 purposes, agencies must modify the data.  When reporting data, agencies 
must aggregate and report their workforce data as follows: 

1.  The two columns under Hispanic or Latino must be combined.  These are 
identified as “White alone Hispanic or Latino” and “All other Hispanic or 
Latino.” 

2.  The population within the category of “White and Black” must be combined 

and included in the “Black or African-American alone” category. 

3.  The population within the category of “White and AIAN” must be combined and 

included in the “American Indian and Alaska Native alone” category. 

4.  The population within the category of “White and Asian” must be combined 

and included in the “Asian alone” category. 

5.  The population within the category of “Black and AIAN” must be included in 

the “Two or more races” category. 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.  The balance of the “Not Hispanic or Latino, two or more races” must be 

included in the “Two or more races” category.  

For more information, please see OMB BULLETIN NO. 00-02 - Guidance on Aggregation 
and Allocation of Data on Race for Use in Civil Rights Monitoring and Enforcement. 

Puerto Rico Community Survey 

The Puerto Rico Community Survey (PRCS) is the equivalent of the ACS for Puerto 
Rico, and began data collection in 2005.  Data results from both the ACS and the PRCS 
are released together as a unified American Community Survey dataset.  However, 
the PRCS data is not included in the U.S. totals for the ACS.  Agencies should not 
modify the U.S. totals to include the PRCS data.  

Where an agency is benchmarking labor market geography against a specific 
occupation, and Puerto Rico is a significant source of applicants, the agency should 
include Puerto Rico as a part of its labor market.  Using the AFF tool, Puerto Rico can 
be added to a labor market through a sort of the “State” options. 

Technical Assistance 

Technical assistance with issues raised in this document can be obtained from staff 
within EEOC’s Office of Federal Operations (ofo.eeoc@eeoc.gov, or 202-663-4599).  In 
addition, a list of additional questions and answers (“Q&A”) can be found at 
http://www.eeoc.gov/. 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
