U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION 

Office of Federal Operations 

Washington, D.C.  20036 

PRACTICAL ADVICE FOR  
DRAFTING AND IMPLEMENTING 
REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION 
PROCEDURES  
UNDER EXECUTIVE ORDER 13164 

July 2005  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PRACTICAL ADVICE FOR DRAFTING AND                 
IMPLEMENTING REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION        
PROCEDURES UNDER EXECUTIVE ORDER 13164 

Introduction ..................................................................................................................... 1 

Initiating the Accommodation Process ............................................................................ 3 

Processing Accommodation Requests............................................................................ 9 

Time Limits.................................................................................................................... 16 

Medical Information ....................................................................................................... 20 

Confidentiality of Medical Information............................................................................ 26 

Reassignment ............................................................................................................... 29 

Denials of Reasonable Accommodation........................................................................ 33 

Information Tracking...................................................................................................... 35 

Informal Dispute Resolution .......................................................................................... 37 

Final Steps: Adoption, Dissemination and Training ....................................................... 38 

Conclusion .................................................................................................................... 39 

Selected EEOC Resources on Disability Issues ........................................................... 40 

Attachment A:   Sample Form 

Confirmation of Request for Reasonable Accommodation 

Attachment B:   Sample Language Regarding Creation of Staff Assistant Slots 

Attachment C:  Sample Form 
           Denial of Reasonable Accommodation Request 

Attachment D: Sample Form                                                  

Reasonable Accommodation Information Reporting Form 

-i-

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 

On July 26, 2000, the tenth anniversary of the enactment of the Americans with 
Disabilities  Act  (ADA),  Executive  Order  (E.O.)  13164  was  issued,  for  the  first  time 
requiring that all executive branch federal agencies institute procedures for processing 
reasonable  accommodation  requests  under  Section  501  of  the  Rehabilitation  Act  of 
1973.1   The purpose of such procedures is to provide employees as well as supervisors 
and managers with an easy-to-understand, step-by-step explanation of the reasonable 
accommodation process. 

 E.O.  13164  allows  each  agency  to  design  procedures  that  best  suit  its 
organizational  needs.  However,  it  requires  that  the  procedures  include  certain  basic 
elements,  such  as  the  processing  of  accommodation  requests,  time  limits,  rules  for 
requesting  supporting  medical  information,  confidentiality,  information  tracking,  and 
informal dispute resolution.2   E.O. 13164 also requires that each agency (and agency 
component, 
its  procedures,  and  any 
modifications it later makes to them, to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
(EEOC). 

issuing  separate  procedures)  submit 

if 

To assist agencies in fulfilling their obligations, EEOC issued the Policy Guidance 
on  Executive  Order  13164:    Establishing  Procedures  to  Facilitate  the  Provision  of 
Reasonable  Accommodation  (Oct.  20,  2000)  (“13164  Policy  Guidance”),  available  at 
http://ww.eeoc.gov/policy/docs/accommodation_procedures.html.    In  addition,  EEOC 
provided  extensive  voluntary  technical  assistance  on  drafting  and  implementation  of 
agencies’  procedures.    EEOC  staff  provided  individualized  feedback  to  the  more  than 
one  hundred  agencies  and  sub-components  submitting  procedures  for  review.      The 
feedback provided detailed comments on procedures that appeared not to comply with 
the  requirements  of  E.O.  13164,  as  well  as  applicable  best  practices  set  forth  in  the 
13164  Policy  Guidance.    Many  agencies  revised  their  procedures  in  accordance  with 
EEOC’s  feedback,  and  re-submitted  their  procedures  to  EEOC  for  further  technical 
assistance.   

     1See Executive Order 13164, Requiring Federal Agencies to Facilitate the Provision 
of Reasonable Accommodation, 65 Fed. Reg. 46565, 2000 WL 1114943 (2000). 

     2Under  E.O.  13164,  Section  3,  agencies  are  also  required  to  notify  their  collective 
bargaining  representatives  and  to  bargain  over  their  reasonable  accommodation 
procedures, to the extent required by law.    

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
   This  report  summarizes  the  key  drafting  and  implementation  tips  offered  to 
agencies.    The  report  is  divided  into  ten  sections,  addressing  each  of  the  different 
aspects  of  the  reasonable  accommodation  process  outlined  in  E.O.  13164,  as  well  as 
effective dissemination procedures and training.  Each section: 

(cid:131)  contains a summary of the relevant basic elements of E.O. 13164 as interpreted 
in the 13164 Policy Guidance, including required provisions and best practices; 

(cid:131)  provides practical drafting advice, based on the common pitfalls EEOC found in 

agency reasonable accommodation procedures; 

(cid:131) 

includes  illustrative  EEOC  federal  sector  appellate  decisions  issued  under 
Section 
at 
www.eeoc.gov/federal/decisions.html;  and 

Rehabilitation 

available 

Act, 

501 

the 

of 

(cid:131)  provides training and implementation tips. 

We hope that federal agencies will use the guidance in this report when drafting, 
revising,  and  implementing  reasonable  accommodation  procedures. 3      In  addition, 
private sector and state and local government employers, although not covered by E.O. 
13164,  can  voluntarily  adopt  reasonable  accommodation  procedures  to  ensure 
compliance  with  Title  I  of  the  Americans  with  Disabilities  Act  (ADA),  using  the  EEOC 
13164  Policy  Guidance  and  this  report  to  design,  draft  and  implement  reasonable 
accommodation procedures.4    

E.O.  13164  requires  that  each  federal  agency  submit  to  EEOC  any  future 
modifications  to  its  reasonable  accommodation  procedures.    Therefore,  EEOC  will 
continue  to  provide  technical  assistance  to  agencies  on  drafting  and  implementation 
concerns. 

     3Issuance  of  procedures  by  federal  agencies  as  well  as  appropriate  dissemination 
and training is necessary in order to comply with Management Directive 715.  See AFinal 
Steps: Adoption, Dissemination, and Training,@ infra at Section X. 

     4Since  the  Rehabilitation  Act  was  amended  in  1992  to  apply  the  standards  in  the 
ADA to complaints of discrimination by federal employees or applicants for employment, 
the  standards  regarding  provision  of  reasonable  accommodation  under  Title  I  of  the 
ADA and Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act are the same. 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
                                                 
I.     INITIATING THE ACCOMMODATION PROCESS 

BASIC ELEMENTS  
(See 13164 Policy Guidance at questions 1-6):    

(cid:31) 

(cid:31) 

(cid:31) 

(cid:31) 

(cid:31) 

(cid:31) 

(cid:31) 

(cid:31) 

(cid:31) 

(cid:31) 

Explain  that  accommodation  requests  can  be  made  by  either  an  applicant 
or an employee.  

Make clear that accommodation requests can be either oral or in writing.   

Do not require that accommodation requests use any particular words (like 
“reasonable accommodation” or “disability”). 

Provide the request confirmation form as an attachment to the procedures 
if the procedures require an applicant or employee to complete such a form 
for record-keeping purposes. 

Require immediate processing of all oral accommodation requests.   Do not 
permit  waiting  until  a  written  request  or  record-keeping  confirmation  form 
is received. 

If  requiring  a  request  confirmation  form,  do  not  require  an  employee  who 
needs  a  type  of  reasonable  accommodation  on  a  repeated  basis  (e.g.,  a 
sign  language  interpreter)  to  submit  the  written  form  each  time  the 
accommodation is needed. 

Do not require that an accommodation request be made at a certain time. 

Allow  more  than  one  agency  official  to  be  designated  to  receive 
accommodation requests. 

Include  information  on  all  the  agency  officials  to  whom  an  applicant  or 
employee may make an accommodation request. 

Allow  a  request  for  reasonable  accommodation  to  be  made  by  either  the 
individual with a disability or a family member, health professional, or other 
representative acting on the individual's behalf.   

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DRAFTING TIPS 

Be clear who must follow the procedures.    

Specify the agency components to which the procedures apply.  Designate authority for 
handling  requests  and  provide  sufficient 
instructions  and  headquarters  contact 
information  in  sub-component  procedures.    Remember  that  both  agency  and  agency 
sub-component procedures, if different, must be submitted to EEOC under E.O. 13164. 

Clearly communicate that processing of oral requests should begin immediately, 
even if written confirmation has not yet been received.   

State that agency officials must begin processing the request as soon as it is received.  
Even  if  the  agency’s  procedures  require  a  requester  to  submit  a  request  confirmation 
form, make clear in the procedures that officials may not wait for receipt of the form to 
begin processing the request.  Processing the request means taking whatever steps are 
necessary  to  act  on  the  request.    This  may  include  referral  of  the  request  to  the 
authorized  decision  maker,  communicating  with  the  requester  to  clarify  the  request, 
obtaining  and  exchanging  information  with  the  requester  to  the  extent  necessary 
regarding  needs  and  alternatives,  searching  for  solutions,  consulting  agency  and 
outside  resources,  determining  whether  the  requester  is  an  individual  with  a  disability, 
evaluating possible accommodations, issuing a decision on the request, and if granted, 
providing the accommodation.  This is often called the “interactive process,” referring to 
the mutual sharing of information and ideas between the requester and the employer. 

Indicate  that  failure  to  initiate  the  processing  of  an  oral  request  may  result  in  undue 
delay in providing reasonable accommodation in violation of the Rehabilitation Act. 

Do not exceed limits of request confirmation forms.    

State that a request for reasonable accommodation must let the employer know that an 
adjustment  or  change  at  work  for  a  reason  related  to  a  medical  condition  is  needed.  
The request can be made orally and does not require the use of “magic words” such as 
“reasonable  accommodation”  or  “disability.    While  further  information  may  be  obtained 
by  the  employer  when  evaluating  the  request,  nothing  more  is  required  for  the 
individual’s statement to legally constitute an accommodation request.  For this reason, 
limit the information sought on request confirmation forms to name, contact information, 
date of request, date of form, office, accommodation requested and reason for request.  
See  Attachment  A  (sample  form  for  confirmation  of  reasonable  accommodation 
requests).  Additional information (including medical documentation) reasonably needed 
to process the accommodation request may be sought during the interactive process. 

A written “confirmation of request” form that asks for more information than is necessary 
to  constitute  an  accommodation  request,  or  that  requires  submission  of  medical 
documentation, will exceed the purpose of a written confirmation form, which is merely to 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
track  request  information.    See  §  VIII,  “Information  Tracking.”    Asking  for  more 
information than is necessary to track the request poses two legal risks: (1) managers or 
supervisors may not realize that an oral or written request as defined above is sufficient 
to trigger the agency’s obligation to evaluate the request for accommodation; and (2) a 
form  that  automatically  asks  for  supporting  medical  information  may  violate  the 
Rehabilitation  Act  rule  that  medical  information  can  only  be  sought  in  support  of  an 
accommodation  request  where  the  disability  and/or  the  need  for  accommodation  is  not 
obvious or already known. 

Accurately label any confirmation forms used.    

Entitle  the  form  “Confirmation  of  Request  for  Reasonable  Accommodation”  or  in  some 
other  way  make  clear  that  it  is  merely  for  keeping  track  of  requests.    This  will  help  to 
ensure that neither supervisors nor requesters mistakenly conclude that an oral request 
is insufficient. 

Explain that accommodation can be requested at any time.   

Affirmatively  state  that  an  individual  may  request  accommodation  whenever  he  or  she 
chooses.    For  example,  the  request  does  not  have  to  be  made  as  soon  as  a  disability 
affects  work  performance,  or  by  some  other  specified  time.  Remind  managers  and 
supervisors  of  their  obligation  to  process  any  accommodation  request,  regardless  of 
when it is received.5  13164 Policy Guidance at question 4.   

Specify a range of officials to whom an accommodation request can be made.   

Make clear that the agency’s obligation to consider an individual’s request begins when 
the request is made to any of the following (see 13164 Policy Guidance at question 5): 

(cid:131)  his/her supervisor; 

(cid:131)  a supervisor or manager in his/her immediate chain of command; 

     5However, reasonable accommodation is always prospective, so an employer is not 
required to excuse performance problems or past misconduct (in violation of a rule that 
is  job-related  for  the  position  in  question  and  consistent  with  business  necessity)  that 
has occurred prior to the accommodation request, even if the problem resulted from the 
individual’s disability.  EEOC Enforcement Guidance: Reasonable Accommodation and 
Undue  Hardship  Under  the  Americans  with  Disabilities  Act  (as  revised  Oct.  17,  2002) 
(AReasonable Accommodation Guidance@) at questions 35-36.  Once a request is made, 
an  employer  must  make  reasonable  accommodation  to  enable  an  otherwise  qualified 
employee with a disability to meet such a conduct standard in the future, barring undue 
hardship,  except  where  the  punishment  for  the  violation  that  has  already  occurred  is 
termination.  Id. at question 36.  

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
(cid:131) 

the EEO office; 

(cid:131)  any  other  office  designated  by 

the  agency 

to  oversee 

the  reasonable 

accommodation process;  or, 

(cid:131) 

in connection with the application process, any agency employee with whom the 
applicant has contact.  

Requiring accommodation requests to be made only to one particular agency official, or 
only  within  one’s  chain  of  command,  will  incorrectly  suggest  to  other  supervisors  and 
managers that they have no obligation to act on any other requests.  To the contrary, the 
procedures should spell out for managers and supervisors the steps they are required to 
take after receiving an accommodation request they are not designated to handle, such 
as  referring  it  within  a  specified  time  frame  to  the  agency  official  who  is  authorized  to 
take action on the request.  (See Section II, below, for suggested language). 

IMPLEMENTATION TIPS 

Help managers and supervisors recognize requests.  

Train managers and supervisors how to recognize reasonable accommodation requests 
so that they can refer the requests to the designated decision maker or issue a decision 
themselves  if  authorized  to  do  so.  Managers  and  supervisors  should  be  specifically 
instructed  to  consider  whether  there  is  any  accommodation  obligation  before  denying 
any  request  for  an  adjustment  or  change  at  work  for  a  reason  related  to  a  medical 
condition.  See EEOC Enforcement Guidance:  Reasonable Accommodation and Undue 
Hardship  Under  the  Americans  with  Disabilities  Act  (as  revised  October  17,  2002) 
(“Reasonable  Accommodation  Guidance”)  at  questions  1-2,  available  at  
http://www.eeoc.gov/policy/docs/accommodation.html.   

Training  should  address  what  legally  constitutes  an  accommodation  request.    It  should 
also  include  examples  of  frequently  overlooked  accommodation  requests,  such  as 
requests for unpaid leave for an employee’s own medical condition beyond the amount 
of  leave  available  under  the  Family  and  Medical  Leave  Act  (FMLA).  See  Reasonable 
Accommodation  Guidance  at  question  21  (individual  with  a  disability  requesting  13 
weeks of leave might be entitled to the 12 weeks maximum allotted under FMLA and the 
additional  week  as  a  reasonable  accommodation  under  ADA).    Other  frequently 
overlooked  accommodation  requests  include  those  that  state  the  accommodation  need 
but do not include a proposed solution, or requests that implicate both the Rehabilitation 
Act  and  other  requirements  (e.g.,  employer 
light  duty  programs  or  workers’ 
compensation). 

Case  Illustration:  Lawler v. United States Postal Service, EEOC Appeal 
No.  01A01535  (Mar.  27,  2003).    After  employee  exhausted  “temporary” 
than 
light  duty,  employer  placed  him 

in  off  duty  status 

rather 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
accommodating  his  disability,  on  the  ground  that  he  did  not  submit  forms 
specifically  stating  that  he  was  requesting  a  permanent  light  duty  position 
within  the  allotted  time  frame.    The  Commission  held  that  failure  by 
complainant to fill out particular forms or to request a permanent light duty 
position  does  not  absolve  the  agency  of  its  duty  to  provide  a  reasonable 
accommodation  under  the  Rehabilitation  Act  where  the  agency  was  on 
notice  of  the  need  for  accommodation.    The  evidence  demonstrated  that 
had the agency engaged in the interactive process, it could have identified 
and  provided  to  complainant  a  reasonable  accommodation  without  undue 
hardship.  

Be aware of special considerations regarding sign language interpretation.   

Make  sure  managers  and  supervisors  are  aware  that  in  some  situations  where  a 
hearing-impaired  employee  is  known  to  need  a  sign  language  interpreter,  the  agency 
may  need  to  provide  the  interpreter  for  crucial  events  such  as  training,  safety  talks, 
discussions  on  work  procedures,  policies  or  assignments,  and  disciplinary  actions, 
whether or not the employee asks. 

Case  Illustration:      Feris  v.  Environmental  Protection  Agency,  EEOC 
Appeal  No.  01934828  (August  10,  1995),  request  for  reconsideration 
denied,  EEOC  Request  No.  05950936  (July  19,  1996).    Agency  violated 
the  Rehabilitation  Act  where  it  was  aware  that  contract  interpreter 
arrangements  it  had  made  (rather  than  hiring  staff  interpreters)  were  not 
providing  complainant  and  others  with  interpretive  services  on  important 
work-related  occasions,  yet  almost  three  years  elapsed  before  any 
concrete action was actually taken by the agency to improve the situation.  
The Commission held that for "a severely hearing impaired employee who 
can sign, reasonable accommodation, at a minimum, requires providing an 
interpreter  for  safety  talks,  discussions  on  work  procedures,  policies,  and 
assignments,  and  for  every  disciplinary  action  so  that  the  employee  can 
understand  what  is  occurring  at  any  and  every  crucial  time  in  his 
employment career, whether or not he asks for an interpreter."6     

     6See also Holton v. United States Postal Service, EEOC Appeal No. 01991307 (Nov. 
7,  2002)  (agency  failed  to  show  it  would  have  posed  an  undue  hardship  to  postpone 
training  session  when  interpreter  service  cancelled);  Saylor  v.  United  States  Postal 
Service,  EEOC  Appeal  No.  01A05281  (November  14,  2002)  (agency  found  liable  for 
denial  of  reasonable  accommodation  in  violation  of  the  Rehabilitation  Act  where  deaf 
employee was denied a sign language interpreter for a 45-minute safety meeting); Wait 
v.  Social  Security  Administration,  EEOC  Appeal  No.  01A11629  (October  2,  2003) 
(agency  violated  Rehabilitation  Act  by  denying  deaf  employee’s  requests  for  an 
interpreter at the twice-monthly staff meetings; it was not an equally effective alternative 
accommodation to instead provide complainant with a meeting agenda and suggest she 
sit  close  to  the  supervisor);  Taylor  v.  Department  of  the  Interior,  EEOC  Appeal  No. 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Process even unconfirmed oral requests.   

Train managers and supervisors to begin processing oral requests immediately, even if 
the  agency  is  still  awaiting  a  written  confirmation  from  the  requester.    A  written 
confirmation  form  from  the  requester  is  not  needed  either  to  evaluate  and  issue  a 
decision on the request or to provide accommodation.  If the requester does not fill out a 
required written confirmation form, an agency official can do so, since the form is merely 
to track requests.  

Educate  managers  on  the  process  for  handling  accommodation  requests, 
including what to do when they receive a request they are not authorized to handle.   

their  responsibilities  with  respect 

Train  managers  and  supervisors  on 
to  any 
accommodation request they receive.  This training should include instructions on what 
steps to take if they receive an accommodation request they are not authorized to handle 
themselves, i.e., the name(s) of the individual to whom they should refer the request, and 
the  time  frame  for  doing  so.      Additionally,  some  agencies  require  that  the  disability 
program  manager  or  an  equivalent  overseer  of  the  process  be  notified  of  each  such 
referral, so that he or she can follow up to ensure the request is timely processed and all 
information is tracked. 

01A34292 (May 3, 2004) (agency’s denial of qualified note taker or captioning service 
for  deaf  employee  attending  out-of-town  training  constituted  denial  of  reasonable 
accommodation). 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                               
II.  Processing Accommodation Requests   

BASIC ELEMENTS 
(See 13164 Policy Guidance at questions 7-12): 

(cid:31) 

(cid:31) 

(cid:31) 

(cid:31) 

Explain how the agency will handle a request for accommodation, including 
specifically  what  steps  will  be  followed,  and  identify  from  whom  the 
individual will receive a final decision.    

Authorize first-line supervisors to process and approve requests whenever 
possible.   

Require  decision  makers  to  communicate  with  the  individual  requesting 
accommodation where the specific limitation, problem, or barrier is unclear; 
an  effective  accommodation  is  not  obvious;  or  where  the  parties  are 
choosing between different possible reasonable accommodations. 

List resources that individuals with disabilities and agency decision makers 
can consult to identify and evaluate possible accommodations.  

DRAFTING TIPS 

Identify decision makers and steps for referring request to authorized official. 

Specify the decision maker and explain the steps managers and supervisors must follow 
when they receive an accommodation request on  which they are not authorized to act.  
Ensure  that  the  procedures:    (1)  identify  who  (by  position  title,  such  as  first-line 
supervisor,  office  director,  etc.)  is  authorized  to  make  decisions  on  different  types  of 
requests;  (2)  explain  specifically  what  types  of  requests  (e.g.,  ordering  assistive 
technology,  removing  architectural  barriers,  etc.)  should  be  forwarded  to  the  identified 
decision maker; and (3) provide for a referral system with time frames.   

For example, procedures can include the following language:  “As a first step, the staff 
member who receives the request must determine who will be responsible for handling it.  
If it is another staff member, s/he should forward it to the appropriate official within three 
days of receipt, with a copy of the referral to the disability program manager.”  In addition, 
the  procedures  could  require  that  the  staff  member  promptly  notify  the  requester  to 
whom the request has been referred for handling. 

Case Illustration:   Wheeler v. Department of the Army, EEOC Appeal No. 
01A30318  (Sept.  30,  2004).    Agency  liable  under  Rehabilitation  Act  for 
denial  of  accommodation  based  on  undue  delay  in  responding  to 
employee’s  original  accommodation  request.    Official  took  no  action  on 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
employee’s request for reserved accessible parking space because it was 
not within his authority to grant the request, and failed to forward it to the 
agency official who was authorized to act.   

Explain who will communicate with the requester.   

Explain who will notify the individual requesting accommodation of the decision to grant 
or deny it.  Where an agency cannot designate in the procedures exactly which official 
will  be  processing  an  accommodation  request  because  this  is  not  known  in  advance, 
instead  create  a  standardized  mechanism  for  case-by-case  notification.    For  example, 
procedures might include language of the following type: “Once a request is received by 
the  decision  maker,  he  or  she  will  (1)  acknowledge  the  request;  (2)  explain  to  the 
applicant  or  employee  that  s/he  will  be  making  the  decision  on  the  request;  and  (3) 
describe what will happen in the processing of the request.” 

Designate back-ups.   

Provide  for  back-up  decision  makers,  to  permit  the  agency  to  continue  receiving  and 
processing  requests  and  providing  reasonable  accommodations  when  the  primary 
decision maker is unavailable. 

Describe step-by-step how to evaluate and resolve an accommodation request.  

Explain  the  steps  for  handling  an  accommodation  request,  including  engaging  in  an 
“interactive process” to obtain and share information.  These steps might include referral 
of  the  request  to  the  authorized  decision  maker  (see  above),  communicating  with  the 
requester to clarify the request, obtaining and exchanging information with the requester 
to  the  extent  necessary  regarding  needs  and  alternatives,  searching  for  solutions, 
consulting  agency  and  outside  resources,  determining  whether  the  requester  is  an 
individual  with  a  disability,  evaluating  possible  accommodations,  issuing  a  decision  on 
the request, and if granted, providing the accommodation.    

Require an interactive process where needed, and explain how to do it. 

Require  the  decision  maker  to  communicate  with  the  individual  where  the  specific 
limitation,  problem,  or  barrier  is  unclear,  where  the  effective  accommodation  is  not 
obvious, or when choosing among different possible accommodations. 

Make  clear  that  by  failing  to  engage  in  this  “interactive  process”  in  appropriate 
circumstances,  the  agency  risks  providing  an  accommodation  that  is  ineffective,  or 
improperly  denying  reasonable  accommodation,  because  it  is  unaware  of  alternatives 
that  the  individual  with  the  disability  or  an  outside  expert  might  have  suggested  if 
consulted.    Provide  guidance  to  managers  and  supervisors  or  designated  decision 
makers  regarding  how  to  engage  in  the  “interactive  process”  upon  receipt  of  an 
accommodation request.  

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
List outside sources for information and advice. 

List  resources  for  identifying  and  evaluating  possible  accommodations  that  individuals 
with  disabilities  and  agency  decision  makers  may  consult,  and  provide  specific  contact 
information.  Encourage decision makers to use these resources as needed. 

Denials based on “undue hardship” must consider overall employer resources. 

State clearly that the overall resources and options available to the employer are legally 
relevant  in  determining  whether  a  requested  reasonable  accommodation  poses  an 
undue  hardship,  not  just  the  budget  or  resources  of  an  individual  segment,  sub-
component, or division within an agency or department. 

Case  Illustration:    Feris  v.  Environmental  Protection  Agency,  EEOC 
Appeal No. 01934828 (Aug. 10, 1995), request for reconsideration denied, 
EEOC Request No. 05950936 (July 19, 1996).  Agency failed to establish 
that  hiring  a  full-time  staff  interpreter  to  accommodate  complainant  and 
eight  other  deaf  employees  at  headquarters  would  have  posed  an  undue 
hardship,  where  the  agency  was  on  notice  that  its  contract  interpreter 
arrangement was ineffective.  In reaching this conclusion, the Commission 
cited,  among  other  things,  evidence  that  the  agency  failed  to  request 
personnel  ceiling  relief  to  permit  hiring  a  staff  interpreter,  and  that  the 
decision  not  to  hire  a  staff  interpreter  was  attributable  to  management 
priorities  for  allocating  resources,  not  the  budget  shortfall  or  partial  hiring 
freeze. 

Require  upper-level  review  before  denying  an  accommodation  based  on  “undue 
hardship.” 

in 

the  chain  of  command  who  can  determine  whether 

Require  that  before  denying  an  accommodation  request  based  on  cost  or  operational 
difficulty,  a  decision  maker  must  obtain  review  from  a  designated  office  or  individual 
higher 
the  proposed 
accommodation would in fact pose an undue hardship. Because the employer’s overall 
resources must be considered, an agency may want to have potential decisions to deny 
a  requested  accommodation  due  to  undue  hardship  made  by  higher-level  officials  with 
more  expertise  and  broader  authority  than  the  official  authorized  to  grant  an 
accommodation request.  All denials of accommodation requests must be in writing and 
must provide a specific explanation of the grounds for denial.  See Section VII, below. 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Specify who is responsible for actually providing any accommodations granted. 

Specify  who  is  responsible  for  actually  providing  an  accommodation  after  the  agency 
grants  a  request.    For  example,  the  procedures  could  specify  that  a  supervisor  who 
grants  a  request  is  also  responsible  to  follow  through  and  make  any  necessary 
arrangements  to  ensure  that  the  accommodation  is  provided  within  the  applicable  time 
limit.  Otherwise, an agency risks insufficient follow-through after a request is granted. 

Avoid conflicts of interest. 

Where  an  agency’s  EEO  staff  participates  in  deciding  accommodation  requests,  an 
actual or perceived conflict of interest may arise if a requester subsequently files an EEO 
complaint  and  the  EEO  staff  is  responsible  for  determining  if  their  own  actions  were  in 
accordance with the Rehabilitation Act. 

Therefore,  do  not  assign  agency  EEO  staff  a  decision  making  role  in  processing 
reasonable  accommodation  requests.    Limit  the  role  of  EEO  staff,  if  any,  to 
administrative  tasks  such  as  referring  requests  to  a  designated  decision  maker  or 
collecting and tracking information on requests.  

In  the  alternative,  if  EEO  staff  is  given  a  decision  making  role  in  accommodation 
requests,  provide  in  the  procedures  that  the  staff  member  will  recuse  him/herself  from 
handling any EEO complaint on the same matter.  Recusal is a safeguard against actual 
or apparent conflicts of interest, and can be used even by small agencies that have only 
one or two EEO staff members by designating an agency official outside the EEO office 
who will be authorized to handle EEO matters where a potential conflict of interest arises. 

For example, procedures might include language of the following type:   “Any EEO Office 
staff  member  who  has  any  involvement  in  processing  a  request  for  reasonable 
accommodation should recuse him/herself from investigating or decision making on any 
subsequent  EEO  counseling  contact  or  complaint  challenging  the  agency’s  handling  of 
the accommodation request.”   

IMPLEMENTATION TIPS 

Consider making certain accommodations available to any employee. 

Although  an  agency  is  not  legally  required  to  provide  an  accommodation  unless  the 
requesting  applicant  or  employee  is  an  “individual  with  a  disability”  under  the 
Rehabilitation  Act,  it  may  offer  accommodation  without  making  this  determination.      In 
fact,  many  employers  choose  to  implement  procedures  for  uniformly  granting  requests 
for  certain  types  of  accommodations  that  can  be  readily  and  inexpensively  provided 
without  determining  whether  the  requester  is  an  individual  with  a  disability.      In  such 
instances, an agency is free to notify the individual that no determination has been made 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as  to  whether  he  or  she  is  an  individual  with  a  disability,  and  the  agency’s  decision  to 
grant the request is not based on the Rehabilitation Act requirements. 

Designate an agency expert as a resource and coordinator. 

Consider  whether  it  would  be  useful  to  have  a  disability  program  manager  or  similar 
designated  expert  to  serve  as  a  resource  and  oversee  the  agency’s  reasonable 
accommodation  process.    See  13164  Policy  Guidance  at  question  9.    Some  agencies 
have designated a single individual to coordinate for the agency overall, and others have 
additionally  assigned  individuals  to  serve  that  function  at  the  regional,  local,  or  facility 
level.  Agencies have utilized such individuals in a variety of ways, including:   

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

to  advise  managers  and  supervisors  who  are  processing  accommodation 
requests;  

to decide particular requests referred to them due to level of difficulty or nature of 
the request;  

to request and/or review medical documentation to determine if a requester is an 
“individual with a disability”;  

to  maintain  medical  information  in  confidential  files,  and  oversee  information 
tracking; and  

to  provide  ongoing  assessment  of  the  agency’s  reasonable  accommodation 
program. 

Provide training for all agency officials responsible for processing requests. 

Make  sure  appropriate  training  is  provided  to  all  agency  officials  responsible  for  (1) 
determining  whether  the  requester  is  an  “individual  with  a  disability”  under  the 
Rehabilitation Act, and (2) engaging in the interactive process. 

Search for a solution even if the employee has not proposed one. 

Where  an  individual  requesting  reasonable  accommodation  is  able  to  identify  the 
problem, but not a solution, some employers make the mistake of refusing to act on such 
requests,  or  placing  the  burden  solely  on  the  employee  to  find  an  accommodation 
solution.    Instead,  the  employer  should  engage  in  the  interactive  process  and  try  to 
identify a solution, consulting outside resources if necessary. 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Search for alternatives if the employee’s proposed solution is ruled out. 

Where  an  individual  requests  a  particular  accommodation  that  is  not  effective  or  would 
pose an undue hardship, or is otherwise not legally required (e.g., removing an essential 
job  function),  some  employers  mistakenly  discontinue  the  interactive  process.    The 
employer  should  continue  the  interactive  process,  exploring  alternatives  until  either  a 
reasonable  accommodation  is  found  or  the  employer  determines  no  accommodation  is 
available.   

Ensure  that  managers  and  supervisors  are  aware  of  the  range  of  possible  types  of 
accommodations,  including:    making  physical  modifications  to  the  workplace;  acquiring 
equipment  or  adaptive  devices;  modifying  existing  equipment;  modifying  policies; 
restructuring a job (swapping or eliminating marginal functions), granting part-time work, 
modifying  a  work  schedule;  providing  sign  language  interpreters  or  readers,  granting 
leave  (use  of  accrued  paid  leave,  or  permitting  unpaid  leave),  permitting  telework,  or 
reassignment to a vacant position. 

Require  decision  makers  to  consult  with  a  higher-up  before  denying  a  request 
based on undue hardship. 

Require  decision  makers  to  consult  with  an  appropriate  official  before  denying  a 
proposed accommodation on the basis of cost or operational difficulty.  Consultation with 
the appropriate official in the chain of command, the disability program manager, or other 
individual  who  can  determine  whether,  based  on  the  employer’s  resources  overall,  the 
proposed  accommodation  would  pose  a  significant  difficulty  or  expense  will  reduce  the 
risk that managers or supervisors will deny a  request based solely on the resources of 
their individual office budgets or based merely on speculation. 

Case Illustration:  Calero-Cerezo v. U.S. Department of Justice, 355 F.3d 
6 (1st Cir. 2004).  Summary judgment for employer denied, where, among 
other  things,  there  was  no  evidence  offered  in  support  of  the  employer’s 
generalized contention that plaintiff’s accommodation request for a transfer 
was unworkable and unprecedented, and there was no evidence that any 
variants  of  plaintiff’s  proposal  were  considered  or  would  have  posed  an 
undue hardship. 

Consider implementing centralized funding mechanisms. 

Consider implementing funding mechanisms that will avoid charging individual offices for 
the cost of accommodations, for example: 

(cid:131)  enter  into  a  partnership  with  the  Department  of  Defense  Computer/  Electronic 
Accommodations  Program  (CAP),  http://www.tricare.osd.mil/cap,  which  offers 
assistive technology, devices, and services at no cost to the partner agency; 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(cid:131)  establish  a  central  fund  for  all  accommodation  costs  not  covered  by  a  CAP 
contract, based on funds allocated by the agency or by annual contributions from 
the  sub-components  (note:    in  the  absence  of  a  central  fund,  agencies  might 
consider  advising  their  sub-components  to  anticipate  expenses  for  reasonable 
accommodations  and  include  those  expenses  as  a  part  of  their  budget  planning 
requests each fiscal year); 

(cid:131)  create  a  central  pool  of  staff  assistant  slots,  not  included  in  a  requesting  office's 
personnel ceiling, to provide readers, interpreters, and other assistants throughout 
the  agency,  as  authorized  under  the  non-competitive  Schedule  A  authority,  5 
C.F.R. § 213.3102 (ll).  See, e.g., Attachment B (sample provision for making staff 
assistant slots available). 

Review and revise policies that may hinder prompt processing of requests. 

Review  and  modify,  in  advance  of  a  specific  request,  any  policies  that  might  affect  the 
agency's  ability  to  respond  promptly  to  requests  for  reasonable  accommodation.    See 
13164 Policy Guidance at question 15.  Among the policies that should be reviewed are 
those that affect:  

(cid:131)  purchasing or leasing of equipment;  

(cid:131)  hiring of, or contracting for, readers, interpreters, or other assistants; and 

(cid:131) 

flexibility to approve leave or to restructure work schedules.   

Ensure individualized assessment of safety risks. 

Ensure  that  managers  and  supervisors  conduct  an  individualized  assessment  of 
objective  information  before  denying  a  requested  accommodation  because  of  safety 
concerns.    An  individualized  assessment  requires  a  case-by-case  determination  of 
whether  the  specific  risk  posed  by  the  individual  poses  a  high  probability  of  substantial 
harm.  Agencies may also require that proposed denials based on direct threat concerns 
be reviewed by specially-trained higher-level officials. 

Case  Illustration:    Evanovich  v.  United  States  Postal  Service,  EEOC 
Appeal No. 07A20029 (May 13, 2004).  Agency violated Rehabilitation Act 
by  refusing  to  accommodate  employee  who  needed  to  perform  his  duties 
while sitting in a chair rather than standing.  While the agency asserted that 
the requested accommodation of a chair would present a tripping hazard to 
other  employees,  it  made  no  effort  to  evaluate  the  actual  risk  of  potential 
harm  from  use  of  a  chair  in  the  particular  location  where  this  employee 
worked, and whether an alternative effective accommodation existed. 

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
III.  TIME LIMITS 

BASIC ELEMENTS 
(See 13164 Policy Guidance at questions 13-14): 

(cid:31) 

(cid:31) 

(cid:31) 

(cid:31) 

(cid:31) 

(cid:31) 

Specify  the  time  frame  in  which  a  reasonable  accommodation  request  will 
be granted or denied, absent extenuating circumstances. 

Make  time 
accommodations as short as reasonably possible.  

limits  for  processing  requests  and  providing  reasonable 

Require  expedited  processing  when  necessary,  for  example  to  enable  an 
individual  to  apply  for  a  job  or  to  participate  in  a  specific  agency  activity 
that is scheduled to occur shortly. 

List  any  “extenuating  circumstances”  that  may  cause  delay,  limited  to 
factors  that  could  not  reasonably  have  been  anticipated  or  avoided  in 
advance of the request for accommodation. 

Require  that  the  individual  be  notified  of  the  reason  for  any  delay  in 
responding to a request for or providing a reasonable accommodation, and 
that the individual be kept informed of the date on which the agency expects 
to complete the process. 

Require  the  agency  to  investigate  and  implement  temporary  measures  to 
assist the individual with a disability during any period of processing delay.  

DRAFTING TIPS  

Make time limits mandatory. 

Specifically  designate  a  time  period  within  which  all  accommodation  requests  must  be 
processed  absent  extenuating  circumstances.      Use  of  mandatory  time  frames  as 
required by E.O. 13164 is more effective than mere goals in ensuring timely processing 
of  requests  and  avoiding  delays  which  can  constitute  a  denial  of  accommodation  in 
violation of the Act. 

Require prompt processing regardless of time limit. 

Make clear that no matter what period of time is allowed, requests should be handled as 
promptly  as  possible.    The  procedures  should  explain  and  illustrate  through  examples 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that a failure to process some accommodation requests in a timely fashion may result in 
“undue  delay”  in  providing  requested  accommodation  to  a  qualified  individual  with  a 
disability, thereby violating the Rehabilitation Act. 

Case  Illustration:      Reagins  v.  United  States  Postal  Service,  EEOC 
Appeal  No.  01974481  (Apr.  6,  2000).    Agency  liable  for  denial  of 
reasonable  accommodation  where  it  initially  placed  complainant  on  leave 
without  pay  rather  than  search  for  a  reassignment  within  her  medical 
restrictions.    The  Commission  noted  that  reassignment  could  have  been 
provided by the agency when accommodation was originally requested, as 
demonstrated by the fact that once complainant started to collect workers’ 
compensation lost wages benefits and it became in the agency’s financial 
interest to search for a vacancy, the agency then immediately offered her a 
permanent limited duty position.  

Use a reasonably quick time period. 

Provide  a  reasonably  quick  time  period  for  processing  requests.    To  address  any 
concerns about time that elapses while awaiting requested documentation or information 
from  the  requester  or  his/her  health  care  provider,  the  procedures  can  provide  that  the 
time limit will be frozen while waiting, and that the clock will restart when the response is 
received.    Whether  by  using  such  a  mechanism  or  by  another  means,  make  sure  that 
some designated time period applies once the agency receives the response.  

the  employee  has  a  disability  and  needs 

For  example,  an  agency’s  procedures  provide  that  a  decision  on  a  request  for 
reasonable accommodation will be made within 15 days of the request, but that the time 
limit  is  frozen  while  awaiting  requested  medical  information.  Three  days  after  an 
accommodation  is  requested,  the  agency  determines  that  documentation  is  needed  to 
substantiate  whether 
the  requested 
accommodation.  If the agency requests the needed medical documentation that day, the 
agency  will  have  12  days  within  which  to  process  and  make  a  decision  on  the 
accommodation  request  once  it  has  received  appropriate  documentation  from  the 
employee.  This procedure allows an agency to exclude from the time frame the period 
during which it is waiting to receive information it has requested from the individual or his 
or  her  health  care  provider,  but  also  ensures  that  once  the  agency  receives  medical 
information,  a  time  frame  applies  to  its  review  of  the  material,  completion  of  the 
interactive process, and issuance of a decision on the accommodation request. 

State when each time frame begins to run, and make sure there are no gaps. 

State with specificity when each time frame begins to run.  For example, if an agency’s 
procedures set a 15-day time limit for processing the request, but fail to specify whether 
the time limit begins to run from the date the request was initially made or the date it is 
referred to the decision maker, there will be uncertainty as to how the time limit applies. 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Make  sure  that  time  periods  apply  throughout  the  processing  of  an  accommodation 
request.  For example, if an agency’s procedures set a 15-day time limit for processing 
the request, but freeze the time limit indefinitely while reviewing medical documentation, 
there will be an open-ended gap in the process during review of medical documentation 
to which no time limit applies at all. This undermines the purpose of having time frames 
in place to avoid undue delay in processing requests. 

It  may  also  be  helpful  to  specifically  designate  someone,  such  as  a  Disability  Program 
Manager,  to  oversee  adherence  to  these  time  frames  and  to  identify  this  person  in  the 
procedures.  See “Designate an agency expert as a resource and coordinator” in Section 
II, above (discussion of some possible roles and responsibilities for a Disability Program 
Manager or equivalent position). 

Define “extenuating circumstances” to time frames clearly. 

Define the term “extenuating circumstances,” see 13164 Policy Guidance at question 14, 
and  give  examples  which  illustrate  that  the  concept  is  very  limited,  including  only  such 
things as waiting for needed medical information from an individual’s health care provider, 
waiting for equipment that is on back-order and cannot be otherwise obtained, or other 
factors outside an agency’s control.    

Absent  clearly  and  accurately  defined  examples  of  what  are  and  are  not  extenuating 
circumstances,  managers  may  think  departure  from  the  established  time  limits  is 
warranted  where  in  fact  it  is  not.    For  instance,  listing  review  of  needed  medical 
documentation  as  an  “extenuating  circumstance”  is  misleading.    Waiting  to  receive 
medical  documentation  from  a  third  party  can  be  an  “extenuating  circumstance,”  but 
review of the documentation once received should be subject to a time limit.  Similarly, it 
would  be  erroneous  to  list  the  conduct  of  an  examination  or  review  of  medical 
documentation  from  the  agency’s  own  physician  or  other  expert  as  an  “extenuating 
circumstance.”    Generally,  delay  by  the  agency’s  chosen  medical  expert  is  not  an 
“extenuating circumstance,” because he or she is generally considered to be within the 
agency’s  control,  even  if  performing  services  on  a  contract  basis.    In  any  event,  as  a 
practical  matter,  if  delays  are  occurring  with  respect  to  review  by  a  contract  medical 
expert, the agency may address this in the terms of the contract. 

Require expedited processing where needed. 

Require  expedited  processing  in  the  event  of  a  time-sensitive  accommodation  request, 
and  provide  examples  in  the  procedures  to  assist  managers  and  supervisors  in 
understanding when this might be necessary, such as to enable an individual to apply for 
a job or participate in a specific agency activity that is scheduled to occur shortly.   

18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Require  processing  of  request  and  delivery  of  accommodation  within  the 
designated time limit. 

Provide  a  time  limit  that  addresses  both  the  time  allotted  to  process  the  request  and 
deliver or implement the accommodation if granted.  Procedures that are unclear about 
whether the processing time allotted includes actual delivery of the accommodation may 
result in undue delay. 

Provide for temporary measures in the event of delay. 

Require  that  in  the  event  of  a  delay,  the  responsible  agency  official  should  confer  with 
the individual and consider providing temporary measures. 

For  example,  where  an  employee  requests  a  schedule  or  shift  change  as  an 
accommodation  due  to  the  side  effects  of  medication,  the  agency  is  free  to  grant  the 
accommodation  on  a  temporary,  provisional  basis  while  considering  the  request,  e.g., 
obtaining  medical  documentation  and  determining  whether  or  not  the  employee  is  an 
individual  with  a  disability  who  needs  the  accommodation  requested.    Similarly,  where 
the agency grants a request for certain computer software for a vision-impaired individual 
but there will be a delay in obtaining it, the services of a reader might be provided in the 
interim.  In a situation where the agency agrees to make certain structural renovations, it 
might  permit  the  individual  to  telework  temporarily  until  the  facility  is  accessible.  
Including examples such as these in procedures will assist managers and supervisors to 
understand when and how temporary measures might be utilized. 

IMPLEMENTATION TIPS 

Wherever possible requests should be processed in less time than the limit allows. 

Ensure that managers and supervisors understand that the provision of a maximum time 
limit in the procedures does not mean that they can or should take the full length of time 
allotted in each case.  Many requests can be processed within days, and failure to do so 
could  constitute  undue  delay  in  violation  of  the  Rehabilitation  Act.    Encourage  agency 
officials not to take the full processing time allotted in a situation where a request can be 
readily granted and provided in much less time than the procedures allow. 

19 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IV.  MEDICAL INFORMATION 

BASIC ELEMENTS 
(See 13164 Policy Guidance at questions 16-19): 

(cid:31) 

(cid:31) 

(cid:31) 

(cid:31) 

(cid:31) 

(cid:31) 

(cid:31) 

Require  medical  documentation  only  when  needed  to  evaluate  the 
accommodation request.  

Explain  that  the  agency  may  request,  and  an  individual  requesting  an 
accommodation  is  required  to  provide,  appropriate  medical  information 
related  to  the  functional  impairment  and  the  requested  accommodation 
where  the  disability  and/or  need  for  accommodation  is  not  obvious  or 
already known.   

Explain  that  the  agency  has  a  right  to  request  relevant  supplemental 
medical information if the information submitted does not clearly explain (i) 
the  nature  of 
the  reasonable 
accommodation, or otherwise clarify how the requested accommodation will 
assist the employee to perform the essential functions of the job or to enjoy 
the benefits and privileges of the workplace, or assist an applicant with the 
application process.  

the  disability,  or 

the  need 

for 

(ii) 

Explain the agency's right to have medical information reviewed by its own 
medical expert at the agency’s expense.   

Identify  the  types  of  medical  information  or  documentation  the  decision 
makers may and may not request. 

Encourage  decision-making  officials  to  identify  to  an  individual  who  has 
provided insufficient documentation the information still needed.   

State  the  circumstances  under  which  the  agency  may  ask  the  individual 
requesting accommodation to be examined by the agency’s physician at the 
agency’s expense. 

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
DRAFTING TIPS  

Expressly  warn  against  asking  for  medical  information  in  support  of  every 
accommodation request. 

Expressly state that the agency may not request medical information in support of every 
accommodation  request,  but  rather  may  require  reasonable  information/documentation 
where the disability and/or need for accommodation is not obvious or otherwise known. 
Make clear that when this standard is met, the agency may only seek that documentation 
which  is  reasonably  necessary  to  establish  that  the  requester  is  an  individual  with  a 
disability and needs the accommodation requested.   

Don’t inadvertently ask for more medical information than is permitted. 

Be  careful  not  to  inadvertently  require  medical  documentation  beyond  what  the 
Rehabilitation Act allows.  For example, procedures should not: 

(cid:131)  use  a  form  (either  a  confirmation  of  request  form  or  a  request  for  medical 
information  form)  that  requires  every  individual  requesting  accommodation  to 
submit supporting medical documentation; 

(cid:131)  advise  decision  makers  to  ask  for  medical  information  far  exceeding  what  is 
reasonably necessary to assess a given request, such as all information defined 
in 5 C.F.R. § 339.102;  

(cid:131)  use  a  medical  release  form  that  constitutes  a  general  release  for  all  medical 

records; or, 

(cid:131)  use  a  pre-printed  form  to  request  medical  information  that  is  not  reasonably 
necessary to determine if the requester is an individual with a disability and needs 
accommodation. 

For  example,  an  error  can  easily  occur  if  in  response  to  an  employee’s  request  for  a 
different  type  of  keyboard  due  to  carpal  tunnel  syndrome,  the  decision  maker  requests 
medical  information  using  a  pre-printed  general  medical  inquiry  form  that  asks  for 
medical  information  on  a  variety  of  unrelated  physical  and  mental  conditions.    If  the 
decision maker fails to delete those portions of the form that ask for records not related 
the 
to  carpal 
Rehabilitation  Act,  because 
the 
accommodation request. 

the  agency  has  violated 
to 

tunnel  syndrome,  even  unintentionally, 

that  medical 

information 

relevant 

is  not 

Case Illustration:  McDonnell v. Navy, EEOC Appeal No. 01A04036 (Sept. 
13,  2002).    Agency  violated  Rehabilitation  Act  by  delaying  provision  of 
accommodation  for  four  weeks  while  it  awaited  supporting  medical 

21 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
documentation  from  employee,  where  employee  had  previously  submitted 
sufficient  documentation  to  demonstrate  he  was  an  individual  with  a 
disability  and  needed  the  accommodation  requested.    Agency  violated 
Rehabilitation Act both by making an improper disability-related inquiry for 
unnecessary  medical  documentation,  and  by  delaying  the  provision  of 
accommodation in the meantime.  

Case Illustration: Gamelin v. United States Postal Service, EEOC Appeal 
No.  01A22307  (Jan.  5,  2004).    The  Commission  rejected  the  agency’s 
contention  that  diabetic  employee’s  doctors’  letters  were  insufficiently 
detailed  to  show  her  need  for  a  schedule  change.    The  letters  explained 
that  a  change  from  her  current  six-day,  split-shift  schedule  to  a  five-day, 
40-hour per week schedule would permit her to avoid serious hypoglycemic 
reactions  by  allowing  her  to  get  adequate  rest  and  have  more  regularly 
scheduled times for eating, sugar testing, and insulin management.  

Explain what types of medical information or documentation can be sought. 

Explain the types of medical information or documentation that may be requested where 
necessary  to  determine  if  the  requester  is  an  individual  with  a  disability  and  needs  the 
accommodation requested, see 13164 Policy Guidance at question 17, such as:  

(cid:131) 

the  past,  present,  and  expected  future  nature,  severity  and  duration  of  the 
impairment (e.g., functional limitations, symptoms, side effects of any treatments, 
etc.);  

(cid:131) 

the activities the impairment limits;  

(cid:131) 

the extent of the limitations; and 

(cid:131)  why 

the 

individual  requires  reasonable  accommodation  or 

the  particular 
reasonable  accommodation  requested,  and  how  the  reasonable  accommodation 
will  assist  the  individual  to  apply  for  a  job,  perform  the  essential  functions  of  the 
job, or enjoy a benefit of the workplace.   

Avoid using any pre-printed medical information forms where possible.  Instead, provide 
in the procedures that the agency official processing the request should determine on a 
case-by-case  basis  whether  information  regarding  any  of  the  above  is  reasonably 
needed in order to determine if the requester is an individual with a disability and needs 
the accommodation requested. 

Address how and when to obtain review by the agency’s own medical expert. 

Explain in detail when and how agencies may have medical documentation reviewed by 
a  medical  expert  and/or  require  the  requester  to  go  to  a  health  care  provider  of  the 

22 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
agency’s  choice.    Explain  that  the  agency  will  pay  the  cost  of  having  its  own  medical 
expert conduct an examination or review documentation.   

to 

in  response 

the  agency’s 

initial  request 

For  example,  procedures  might  include  language  of  the  following  type:    “If  the 
for  medical 
information  submitted 
documentation  does  not  clearly  explain  the  nature  of  the  disability  or  the  need  for 
reasonable  accommodation, 
the  agency  may  request  reasonable  supplemental 
documentation.    The  processing  official  should  explain  to  the  requesting  individual  why 
the documentation is insufficient and what information is needed.  The processing official 
can  allow  the  individual  an  opportunity  to  provide  the  information,  or  may  alternatively 
ask  the  individual  to  sign  a  limited  release  and  then  either  submit  a  list  of  specific 
questions to the individual’s health care professional or have the agency’s own physician 
contact  the  individual’s  health  care  provider.    If  this  does  not  result  in  sufficient 
information, the agency may require the requester to go to a health care provider of the 
agency’s  choice  at  the  agency’s  expense.”  See  generally  13164  Policy  Guidance  at 
text preceding question 16 and at questions 18-19. 

“Freeze” time frames while awaiting medical information. 

Provide  in  the  procedures  that  when  a  decision  maker  requests  appropriate  medical 
documentation all time frames freeze until the requester provides the documentation the 
agency has requested.  This will address any agency concerns about timely processing, 
yet will avoid misleading agency officials to conclude incorrectly that they have no legal 
obligation to take action on the accommodation request if the medical documentation is 
submitted by the requester after the agency’s specified deadline.  See Section III (Time 
Limits, Drafting Tips). 

Require action even if medical information is received belatedly. 

Make  clear  that  while  agency  officials  need  not  provide  an  accommodation  while 
awaiting  reasonably  requested  supporting  medical  documentation,  they  must  continue 
processing  the  accommodation  request  when  the  documentation  is  ultimately  received, 
even if the documentation is received after the time limit expires.     

Consider different ways to utilize a disability program manager or other expert. 

To  ensure  that  medical  documentation  requests  are  handled  appropriately,  some 
agencies’  procedures  provide  that  if  a  supervisor  concludes  medical  information  is 
necessary  to  process  an  accommodation  request,  the  request  must  be  forwarded  to  a 
trained  disability  program  manager,  reasonable  accommodation  coordinator,  or  other 
trained  expert  to  review  the  request  and,  if  necessary,  obtain  and  review  the  medical 
documentation.  This method has three benefits: 

23 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

it  leaves  difficult  legal  decisions  (such  as  whether  a  requester  is  a  qualified 
individual with a disability) in the hands of someone with training and experience 
in the area; 

it  avoids  the  discomfort  some  individuals  experience  when  they  have  to  provide 
medical information to supervisors and managers; and  

it  lessens  the  chance  that  the  Rehabilitation  Act’s  confidentiality  rules  will  be 
violated because it limits the number of people with access to confidential medical 
information. 

Some  agencies  provide  that  while  supervisors  are  not  required  to  do  so,  they  may 
choose to seek the assistance of a trained agency expert to help obtain and/or evaluate 
the documentation.  

IMPLEMENTATION TIPS 

Training on when and how much medical information may be requested. 

is 

imperative 

that  all  staff  given  authority 

It 
to  review  and  evaluate  medical 
documentation  receive  training  on  how  to  comply  with  the  Rehabilitation  Act  rules 
regarding when and how much medical information and documentation may be required.   
An agency must also ensure that all staff are aware that failing to abide by these rules is 
an independent violation of the Rehabilitation Act, and that the rules protect all applicants 
and  employees,  not  just  individuals  with  disabilities.  See  Reasonable  Accommodation 
Guidance at question 8 and examples.  

Case Illustration:  Vindiola v. United States Postal Service, EEOC Appeal 
No.  07A20046  (Sept.  16,  2003).    While  the  agency’s  initial  request  for 
fitness-for-duty information was reasonable following complainant’s seizure 
at work during which he was injured, the agency exceeded the scope of the 
disability-related 
the 
Rehabilitation  Act  when  it  made  follow-up  requests  for  unrelated  medical 
history records, including all mental health records. 

inquiries  and  medical  exams  permitted  under 

Training on legal definition of “individual with a disability.” 

All individuals authorized by an agency’s procedures to determine whether a requester is 
an  “individual  with  a  disability”  under  the  Rehabilitation  Act  should  receive  specific 
advance training regarding the definition of disability, taking into account relevant EEOC 
guidance and federal sector appellate decisions as well as U.S. Supreme Court case law. 

24 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Advance  explanation  to  management  regarding  what  information  they  will  be 
provided. 

If an agency adopts a system in which any needed medical information will be reviewed 
and assessed solely by a disability program  manager or other expert, it should provide 
appropriate  advance  explanation  to  supervisors  and  managers  about  the  implications.  
Due  to  Rehabilitation  Act  confidentiality  rules,  the  expert  will  not  share  with  them  the 
details  of  the  medical  condition,  but  rather  will  only  share  information  the  supervisor  or 
restrictions  and 
manager  needs 
accommodations.    Absent  this  explanation  to  supervisors  and  managers,  they  may 
mistakenly believe that they have a right to learn the specifics of an employee’s medical 
condition  and  may  be  reluctant  to  cooperate  in  providing  accommodation  without 
receiving this information.  

the  necessary  work 

i.e.,  about 

to  know, 

25 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
V.   CONFIDENTIALITY OF MEDICAL INFORMATION  

BASIC ELEMENTS 
(See 13164 Policy Guidance at questions 20 and 26): 

(cid:31) 

(cid:31) 

Explain  that  all  medical  information  must  be  kept  confidential, 
meaning maintained in files separate from the individual’s personnel 
file. 

Explain to whom and under what circumstances medical information 
may be disclosed. 

DRAFTING TIPS 

List  the  limited  circumstances  under  which  confidential  medical  information  may 
be disclosed. 

through 

that  medical 

information,  whether  obtained 

reasonable 
Specify 
accommodation  process  or  otherwise,  may  only  be  disclosed 
limited 
the 
circumstances described at question 20 of the Policy Guidance.    Explain that “medical 
information”  includes  the  fact  that  someone  is  receiving  an  accommodation  or  has  a 
disability,  as  well  as  any  information  concerning  an  individual’s  medical  condition  or 
history, regardless of whether the information was provided voluntarily or in response to 
a  disability-related  question.  See  EEOC  Enforcement  Guidance:  Preemployment 
Disability-Related  Inquiries  and  Medical  Examinations  (Oct.  10,  1995),  available  at 
http://www.eeoc.gov/policy/docs/preemp.html.   

the 
in 

Procedures that provide less detailed explanations of the confidentiality obligation by, for 
example,  stating  only  that  medical  information  must  be  kept  confidential  or  may  be 
disclosed  “only  in  accordance  with  applicable  law,”  do  not  provide  specific  enough 
information  to  allow  managers  and  supervisors  to  understand  their  confidentiality 
obligations. 

Provide examples. 

Ensure that supervisors and managers understand how the confidentiality rules apply by 
providing real-life examples in the procedures, such as: 

(cid:131)  An  individual  requests  assistive  technology  for  his  computer  as  a  reasonable 
accommodation.  The technology expert at the agency is consulted regarding the 
appropriate  computer  equipment.    Although  the  expert  may  need  to  know  the 
requester’s functional limitations to determine technical needs, she likely does not 

26 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
need to know the requester’s underlying medical condition unless she is also the 
decision maker on whether the request will be granted.  

(cid:131)  An  individual  requests  and  receives  a  special  lumbar-support  chair  as  a 
reasonable  accommodation.    The  other  employees  in  the  office  ask  their 
supervisor  why  their  coworker  is  receiving  “special  treatment.”    The  supervisor 
would violate the Rehabilitation Act if he revealed that the coworker received the 
chair as a reasonable accommodation. There is no exception to the Rehabilitation 
Act’s requirement of confidentiality that allows disclosure of medical information in 
this  circumstance.    See  Reasonable  Accommodation  Guidance  at  question  42 
(discussing suggested ways managers can respond to co-worker questions of this 
sort,  for  example  by  emphasizing  that  it  is  the  employer’s  policy  to  assist  any 
employee who encounters difficulties in the workplace, pointing  out that many of 
the  workplace  issues  confronted  by  employees  are  personal,  and  that,  in  these 
circumstances, it is the employer’s policy to respect employee privacy). 

IMPLEMENTATION TIPS 

Train  managers  and  supervisors  to  forward  medical  documentation  to  the 
appropriate official. 

Managers  and  supervisors  should  be  trained  to  submit  any  medical  documentation 
obtained in connection with a request for reasonable accommodation to the designated 
manager who maintains medical documentation for the employer.  If no such individual 
has  been  designated,  the  manager  or  supervisor  should  be  instructed  to  keep  the 
documentation in a separate medical file.   

Educate  managers  and  supervisors  about  the  extent  of  the  confidentiality 
obligation. 

Make  sure  supervisors  and  managers  understand 
the  Rehabilitation  Act 
confidentiality obligation is not limited to the medical diagnosis.  The fact that someone 
has  requested  an  accommodation,  or  that  something  is  being  provided  as  an 
accommodation,  also  constitutes  confidential  medical  information.  See  Reasonable 
Accommodation Guidance at question 42.  

that 

Make clear that the confidentiality obligation applies to everyone. 

Supervisors and managers should be made aware that the confidentiality rules apply to 
all applicants and employees, whether or not they are individuals with disabilities.  This 
actually  simplifies  matters  for  supervisors  and  managers  because  they  can  operate  on 
the premise that all medical information, regardless of how they obtained it or to whom it 
applies, must be kept confidential. 

27 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Case Illustration:   Higgins v. Department of the Air Force, EEOC Appeal 
No. 01A13571 (May 27, 2003).  The Commission held, in accordance with 
EEOC policy guidance, that the Rehabilitation Act requires managers and 
supervisors  to  keep  confidential  the  medical  information  of  all  applicants 
and employees, whether or not they are individuals with disabilities.  

Emphasize that violations of the confidentiality requirement are serious. 

Supervisors and managers may feel that the confidentiality requirement is less stringent 
than the Rehabilitation Act’s other nondiscrimination requirements and that a violation of 
confidentiality will not result in liability for the agency.  Training should emphasize that a 
violation  of  the  Rehabilitation  Act’s  medical  confidentiality  requirements  exposes  the 
agency to liability, even if no other action is taken against the individual whose medical 
information is disclosed. 

Case Illustration:  Brunnell v. United States Postal Service, EEOC Appeal 
No.  07A10009  (July  5,  2001).    Agency  violated  Rehabilitation  Act  by 
placing  medical  information  in  complainant’s  official  personnel  file.    The 
agency  was  ordered  to  pay  compensatory  damages  and  complainant’s 
costs  incurred  in  prosecuting  the  claim,  as  well  as  to  train  managers  and 
supervisors on the relevant law and to consider disciplinary action against 
the responsible agency official. 

Case  Illustration:    Tyson  v.  United  States  Postal  Service,  EEOC  Appeal 
No.  01992086  (Aug.  23,  2002).    Agency  violated  Rehabilitation  Act  by 
disclosing complainant’s medical condition and symptoms in a letter mailed 
to  other  installations  seeking  a  vacancy  to  which  he  could  be  reassigned. 
Although  the  other  managers  needed  to  be  alerted  to  complainant’s  work 
restrictions and his need for accommodation, they had no need to know his 
condition or symptoms. 

Case Illustration:  Gianikos v. United States Postal Service, EEOC Appeal 
No.  01A21992  (Oct.  16,  2003), request  for  reconsideration  denied,  EEOC 
Request No. 05A40208 (Jan. 22, 2004).  Complainant’s former supervisor 
violated 
the  Rehabilitation  Act  by  disclosing  complainant’s  medical 
condition  on  an  evaluation  form  sent  to  other  facilities  at  which  he  was 
seeking a position.  Complainant did not need to show that the disclosure 
was  the  cause  of  his  non-selection  to  establish  a  violation  of  the 
Rehabilitation Act.  The agency was ordered to remove all documentation 
containing  medical  information  from  complainant’s  work  folder  and  train 
various  management  officials,  with  the  issues  of  compensatory  damages 
and attorney’s fees remanded to an Administrative Judge. 

28 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VI.    REASSIGNMENT 

BASIC ELEMENTS 
(See 13164 Policy Guidance at questions 21-23): 

(cid:31) 

(cid:31)   

Explain  when  reassignment  will  be  required  as  a  reasonable 
if  the  agency  determines  that  no  reasonable 
accommodation 
accommodation will permit the employee with a disability to perform 
the essential functions of his or her current position. 

Identify  the  agency  personnel  responsible  for  conducting  the  search 
for a reassignment, and require these individuals to consult with the 
affected employee as necessary to determine:  

•  whether there are limits on the search the employee would like 

the agency to conduct;  

•  whether the employee is qualified for a particular job; and  

•  whether 

the 

reasonable 
accommodation  to  perform  the  essential  functions  of  a  new 
position. 

employee  would 

need 

a 

DRAFTING TIPS 

Explain that reassignment may not be considered unless the employee cannot be 
accommodated in his or her current position, or the employee voluntarily agrees. 

Make  clear  that  reassignment  is  the  accommodation  of  last  resort,  i.e.,  unless  the 
employee  voluntarily  agrees,  the  employer  cannot  resort  to  reassignment  unless  the 
employee  cannot  be  accommodated  in  his  or  her  current  position.  State  that  an 
individual with a disability should not be required to accept a reassignment if there is an 
accommodation  that  would  allow  the  individual  to  remain  in  his  or  her  current  job  and 
does  not  pose  an  undue  hardship.    For  more  detailed  information  regarding  the  nature 
and scope of the reassignment obligation, see Reasonable Accommodation Guidance at 
text preceding question 25 and at questions 25-31. 

Case Illustration:  Coe v. United States Postal Service, EEOC Appeal No. 
01A20972  (Aug.  11,  2003).  Agency  violated  Rehabilitation  Act  by 
reassigning  complainant  to  another  facility  due  to  her  medical  restrictions 
(knee  arthritis),  instead  of  providing  the  accommodations  she  had 
requested to enable her to remain in her clerk job (a ramp and a modified 

29 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
failed 

  The  agency 

the  requested 
work  schedule). 
accommodations  would  have  posed  an  undue  hardship.    Unless  the 
employee  voluntarily  agrees  to  the  reassignment  as  an  accommodation 
solution, reassignment is the accommodation of last resort.  See also Angin 
& Angin v. United States Postal Service, EEOC Appeal Nos. 01980302 and 
01982262 (Aug. 22, 2001). 

to  show 

that 

Explain when reassignment must be considered prior to termination. 

Reassignment  must  be  considered  as  an  accommodation  prior  to  terminating  an 
individual  with  a  disability  who  cannot  be  accommodated  in  his  or  her  current  position.  
See  13164  Policy  Guidance  at  questions  21-22.    Reassignment  should  be  considered 
even if not specifically requested, if the employee cannot be accommodated in his or her 
position.    For  more  detailed  information,  see  Reasonable  Accommodation  Guidance  at 
text preceding question 25 and at questions 25-31. 

Case  Illustration:    Philippe  v.  Social  Security  Administration,  EEOC 
Appeal No. 01A12653 (May 15, 2003).  Agency violated Rehabilitation Act 
when  it  denied  complainant’s  accommodation  request  for  transfer  that 
would permit her to have a shorter commute needed to avoid exacerbating 
her  seizure  disorder.    Compensatory  damages  available  because  agency 
failed to make good faith effort to accommodate. 

Case  Illustration:    Rowlette  v.  Social  Security  Administration,  EEOC 
Appeal No. 01A10816 (Aug. 1, 2003). Complainant, a claims examiner with 
stress-induced  eating  disorder,  could  no  longer  perform  an  essential 
function  of  her  job  (interviewing  members  of  the  public).    Agency  violated 
Rehabilitation  Act  by  terminating  complainant  instead  of  reassigning  her.  
Testimony  by  complainant,  her  former  supervisor,  and  an  agency  staffing 
specialist  established  that  various  positions  for  which  complainant  was 
qualified were available for reassignment during the relevant time period. 

Include practical guidance regarding reassignment. 

Offer  detailed  practical  guidance  regarding  reassignment  as  an  accommodation  to 
ensure that decision makers and requesters have a clear idea of what will happen in the 
process and when it will happen.  Address details such as:  

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

the  circumstances  when  it  would  be  appropriate  to  consider  reassignment  as  a 
reasonable accommodation;  

the  process  for  initiating  a  search  and  developing  search  parameters,  including 
identifying  the  decision  maker  responsible  for  conducting  the  search,  the  type  of 
search that would be done (i.e., identifying vacant positions which were equivalent 
to,  or  at  a  lower  grade  than  the  previous  position,  that  the  individual  with  the 

30 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
disability was qualified to perform), and the scope and the duration of the vacancy 
search;7 

(cid:131)  extending an offer for the reassigned position;  

(cid:131)  processing acceptance or rejection of the agency offer; and  

(cid:131)  what  happens  when  no  positions  are  identified  (i.e.,  a  final  decision  explaining 

why an accommodation cannot be provided). 

Insufficient  practical  guidance  on  the  steps  for  considering  reassignment  may  lead  a 
supervisor or manager mistakenly to conclude that a reassignment is not available in a 
particular situation, resulting in a violation of the Rehabilitation Act. 

Case Illustration:  Dalton v. Department of the Interior, EEOC Appeal No. 
01940693 (Jan. 4, 1995). When complainant’s office was transferred from 
Washington,  D.C.  to  Colorado,  he  advised  the  agency  that  medical  risks 
posed  by  his  disability  precluded  a  cross-country  move.  Prior  to  issuing  a 
termination  notice,  the  deciding  official  never  personally  investigated 
reassignment in the Washington area, but merely assumed that Personnel 
had looked into it. The Chief of the Personnel Division stated that he "may" 
have  talked  with  appellant  about  the  possibility  of  locating  an  alternative 
position  for  him  in  Washington,  and  that  he  was  "pretty  sure"  that  there 
were no positions open with the bureau in the Washington DC area.  Under 
these  facts,  EEOC  held  that  the  agency  failed  in  its  duty  to  reasonably 
investigate options for reassigning appellant to a vacant position for which 
he was qualified.  

Emphasize the importance of communication. 

Emphasize  the  importance  of  communicating  with  the  employee  to  find  out  his  or  her 
current  job  tasks  and  skills  level,  the  limits  the  employee  may  want  to  place  on  the 
vacancy search, and the other types of jobs within the agency that the employee may be 
able to perform.  Lack of communication between the decision maker and requester may 
lead  to  a  mistaken  denial  of  an  accommodation  request  (if,  for  example,  the  decision 
maker is not fully aware of the requester’s skills and abilities) or to unnecessary use of 

     7An employer’s obligation to offer reassignment to a vacant position is not limited to 
vacancies  within  an  employee’s  office,  branch,  agency,  department,  facility,  personnel 
system (if the employer has more than a single personnel system), or geographical area.  
This  is  true  even  if  the  employer  has  a  policy  of  prohibiting  transfers  from  one  office, 
branch, agency, department, facility, personnel system, or geographical area to another.  
The extent to which an employer must search for a vacant position will be an issue of 
undue hardship.  See Reasonable Accommodation Guidance at question 27. 

31 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
resources  (such  as  searching  for  a  vacant  position  in  geographic  area(s)  to  which  the 
requester is unwilling to be reassigned even if a vacancy is available there). 

IMPLEMENTATION TIPS 

Ask what reassignments the requester is willing to accept. 

If  reassignment  is  being  considered,  the  responsible  official  should  explain  to  the 
employee why the agency has concluded that the employee cannot be accommodated in 
his or her current position, and should find out (and document) what parameters, if any, 
the employee has with respect to the reassignment.  For example, the responsible official 
should inquire whether: 

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

the  employee  is  willing  to  be  reassigned  outside  the  facility  or  outside  the 
commuting area, and if so, to what locations;  

the employee is willing to be reassigned to a different type of position for which he 
or she may be qualified, and if so to what type(s);  

the  employee  is  willing  to  be  reassigned  to  a  different  sub-component  of  the 
department, and if so, to which one(s);  

the employee is willing, if no position is available at his or her current grade level, 
to be reassigned to a lower-grade position, and if so, down to what grade.  

The  agency  can  then  conduct  the  search  within  the  parameters  the  employee  has  set.  
This  method  takes  account  of  the  employee’s  preferences  while  at  the  same  time 
potentially minimizing the scope of the vacancy search the employer needs to conduct. 

32 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VII. 

DENIALS OF REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION 

BASIC ELEMENTS 
(See 13164 Policy Guidance, Sections F and H): 

(cid:31) 

(cid:31) 

Explain  that  denials  of  requests  for  reasonable  accommodation  must  be  in 
writing and specifically explain the reasons a request was denied (e.g., why 
the medical documentation is inadequate to establish that the individual has 
a  disability  or  needs  reasonable  accommodation,  why  the  requested 
accommodation  would  not  be  effective,  or  why  the  accommodation  would 
pose an undue hardship).  

Make  clear  that  denials  of  requests  for  reasonable  accommodation  must 
include information about the individual's right to file an EEO complaint and 
to  invoke  other  statutory  processes,  as  appropriate,  as  well  as  the 
availability of the informal dispute resolution process.   

DRAFTING TIPS 

Explain  that  denials  of  reasonable  accommodation  requests  must  specifically 
describe the reasons for denial. 

to 

  Attach 

the  procedures  a 

Provide  a  clear  explanation  in  the  procedures  as  to  how  specific  the  reasons  for  denial 
form  entitled  “Denial  of  Reasonable 
should  be. 
Accommodation Request” and state that decision makers should use the attached form.  
Decision  makers  should  be  told  that  in  addition  to  checking  the  box  that  correctly 
describes  the  reasons  for  the  denial  in  question  (e.g.,  “accommodation  ineffective,” 
“accommodation  would  cause  undue  hardship,”  etc.),  they  should  provide  a  detailed 
description of why the accommodation would, for example, be ineffective or cause undue 
hardship.  See, e.g., Attachment C (sample denial form that requires decision makers to 
fill out a checklist as well as provide a narrative explanation). 

Procedures  which  fail  to  provide  a  denial  form  or  which  use  a  less  detailed  form  may 
cause supervisors and managers to omit or misstate important information. 

Explain that denials must be in writing and include certain specific information. 

State that denials, in addition to being in writing and including the specific reasons for the 
denial, must also include the following information: 

(cid:131) 

the identity of the employee or office that made the decision;  

33 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(cid:131) 

if a specific requested accommodation has been denied and another offered in its 
place, the reasons for the denial and the reasons the agency believes the chosen 
accommodation will be effective;  

(cid:131) 

information about the individual’s right to file an EEO complaint and to invoke other 
statutory processes; and  

(cid:131) 

information about the availability of the informal dispute resolution process.  

The  best  way  to  make  certain  that  all  denials  are  in  writing  and  include  the  necessary 
information is to require decision makers to use a pre-printed denial form and attach that 
denial  form  to  the  procedures.  See,  e.g.,  Attachment  C  (sample  denial  form  with  pre-
printed  information  regarding  filing  rights;  this  form  can  be  adapted  to  incorporate 
information regarding an agency’s own particular reconsideration procedures).   

IMPLEMENTATION TIPS 

Encourage decision makers to consult with an expert. 

Notwithstanding  that  an  agency’s  procedures  may  give  supervisors  or  managers  the 
authority  to  deny  requests  on  their  own,  a  good  practice  even  for  experienced  decision 
makers is never to deny an accommodation request without consulting a knowledgeable 
resource.  The agency’s disability program manager or other reasonable accommodation 
expert  has  access  to  numerous  resources  and  usually  has  more  experience  than  other 
decision makers at the agency.  While a particular requested reasonable accommodation 
may seem like a clear case of “undue hardship” to a supervisor or manager, the agency 
expert, with access to objective information about the agency’s available resources, may 
see the situation differently.  

Case  Illustration:      Forde  v.  United  States  Postal  Service,  EEOC  Appeal 
No. 01A12670 (Oct. 9, 2003).  Agency failed to establish that restructuring 
complainant’s  job  by  assigning  certain  marginal  functions  to  co-workers 
would  pose  an  undue  hardship.    The  agency  manager  testified  that 
assigning  someone  else  the  tasks  that  complainant  could  not  perform 
"would impact [the manager’s] operation," but provided no description of the 
impact.    The  manager  also  testified  that  this  accommodation  would  affect 
other employees, and that she was “not saying that it could not be done, but 
it's  normally  not  done."    The  Commission  found  these  to  be  conclusory 
statements  that  were  insufficient  to  demonstrate  the  impact  the  agency's 
operations  or  its  other  employees.    In  reaching  this  conclusion,  the 
Commission  also  relied  on  testimony  establishing  that  employees  traded 
functions  on  a  frequent  basis  and  that  employees  had,  in  the  past,  been 
excused from various duties. 

34 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VIII.  INFORMATION TRACKING 

BASIC ELEMENTS 
(See 13164 Policy Guidance at Section G): 

(cid:31) 

(cid:31) 

Ensure  that  the  agency’s  systems  of  record  keeping  track  the 
processing of requests for reasonable accommodation.  

Explain  that  while  the  an  agency  is  not  required  to  maintain  a 
particular  record  keeping  system,  documents,  or  databases,  all 
agencies must be able to identify at least the following information: 

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

the  number  of  reasonable  accommodations,  by  type,  that  have 
been  requested  for  the  application  process  and  whether  those 
requests have been granted or denied; 

jobs 

(occupational  series,  grade 

level,  and  agency 
the 
component)  for  which  reasonable  accommodations  have  been 
requested; 

the  types  of  reasonable  accommodations  that  have  been 
requested for each of those jobs;  

the  number  of  reasonable  accommodations,  by  type,  for  each 
job 
the  number  of 
that  have  been  approved,  and 
accommodations, by type, that have been denied;  

the  number  of  requests  for  reasonable  accommodations,  by 
type, that relate to the benefits or privileges of employment, and 
whether those requests have been granted or denied;  

reasons 

the 
accommodation;  

for  denial  of 

requests 

for 

reasonable 

the  amount  of  time  taken  to  process  each  request  for 
reasonable accommodation; and  

the sources of technical assistance that have been consulted in 
trying to identify possible reasonable accommodations. 

35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DRAFTING TIPS 

Require the completion of a Reasonable Accommodation Reporting Form. 

Explain that after a reasonable accommodation request is granted or denied, the decision 
maker  should  complete  a  Reasonable  Accommodation  Reporting  form,  which  tracks  all 
the required information.  Attach the form to the procedures.  Provide instructions on who 
is to complete the form and when, and that it be sent, along with any other documentation 
collected  during  the  reasonable  accommodation  process,  to  an  individual  designated  to 
cull and maintain the information, such as the agency disability program manager.  See, 
e.g., Attachment D (sample Reasonable Accommodation Reporting Form). 

Provide time periods for maintaining records. 

Explain that records related to a particular individual who has requested accommodation 
will  be  maintained  for  the  duration  of  the  employee’s  tenure.    This  helps  ensure  that  an 
individual is not asked to provide medical information that has previously been submitted.      

Explain  that  information  or  any  cumulative  records  used  to  track  the  employer’s 
performance with regard to reasonable accommodation will be retained for at least three 
years.  Tracking performance over a three year period is critical to enable an agency to 
assess whether it has adequately processed and provided reasonable accommodation. 

IMPLEMENTATION TIPS 

Designate someone to maintain and analyze the collected information. 

Assign  someone  to  analyze  the  information  collected  to  measure  the  performance  of  a 
reasonable  accommodation  program,  determine  areas  that  require  further  training  or 
revisions to the procedures, and hold decision makers accountable.   

For  example,  some  agencies  have  implemented  a  computerized  tracking  system  for  all 
the  information  required  by  E.O.  13164,  with  the  ability  to  generate  statistical  reports 
analyzing the data in various ways. 

36 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IX.  INFORMAL DISPUTE RESOLUTION 

BASIC ELEMENTS 
(See 13164 Policy Guidance, at Section H): 

(cid:31) 

Encourage the use of informal dispute resolution processes that allow 
individuals  with  disabilities  to  obtain  prompt  reconsideration  of 
denials of reasonable accommodation. 

DRAFTING TIPS 

Provide for multiple levels of reconsideration. 

Make  clear  that  the  reconsideration  process  should  provide  for  reconsideration  by  the 
original decision maker AND a second level of reconsideration by an agency official who 
was  not  involved  in  the  original  decision.    Providing  independent  review  will  enhance 
applicants’ and employees’ trust in the fairness of the process. 

Explain the right to file an EEO complaint and the other statutory rights. 

Explain  that  decision  makers  should  use  a  pre-printed  denial  form,  attached  to  the 
procedures, whenever a request is denied.  In addition to explaining the reasons for the 
denial, as discussed above, the form contains a complete statement of the notice of rights, 
such  as  the  right  to  file  a  complaint  in  the  EEO  process.    This  avoids  the  risk  of  the 
decision  maker  forgetting  to  provide  the  notice  of  rights  in  some  cases,  or  of  incorrectly 
explaining  the  rights.    It  also  ensures  that  the  requester  will  be  aware  that  invoking  the 
reconsideration process does not toll the time frame for filing an EEO complaint, or other 
time  frames  which  begin  running  upon  receipt  of  the  agency’s  original  decision  denying 
accommodation.  

IMPLEMENTATION TIPS 

Ensure alternative dispute resolution process is accessible. 

All  alternative  dispute  resolution  processes  must  be  accessible  to  individuals  with 
disabilities.    Such  employer-provided  dispute  resolution  mechanisms  are  a  benefit  or 
privilege  of  employment  for  those  employees  eligible  to  participate,  and  as  such  the 
employer  may  be  obligated  to  provide  reasonable  accommodation  if  requested  for  the 
dispute resolution process itself.   

37 

 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
X.   

Final  Steps:    Adoption,  Dissemination 
and Training 

E.O.  13164  required  that  federal  agencies  establish  reasonable  accommodation 
procedures  and  submit  them  to  the  EEOC  by  July  2001.    Any  agency  that  has  not 
submitted  procedures  to  the  EEOC,  made  any  necessary  revisions  based  on  EEOC’s 
feedback,  and  completed  final  adoption  and  issuance  of  reasonable  accommodation 
procedures is not in compliance with E.O. 13164.  In addition, since maintaining a model 
EEO  program  under  EEOC  Management  Directive  715  requires  adoption  and 
dissemination  of  complete  reasonable  accommodation  procedures,  an  agency  that  has 
failed to do so is not in compliance with the Management Directive. 

EEOC’s 13164 Policy Guidance, at § I.C., explains that each agency must make copies of 
its  reasonable  accommodation  procedures  readily  available  to  all  employees,  and  must 
also educate employees about its procedures.  

While agencies are not required to state in the procedures how dissemination or training 
on the procedures will occur, agencies may choose to do so.  Regardless, each agency 
must take whatever steps are necessary to disseminate their reasonable accommodation 
procedures,  and  any  accompanying  forms,  in  a  variety  of  ways  to  ensure  access  by  all 
applicants and employees, and to provide appropriate training. 

(cid:131)  Suggested means of dissemination include providing copies to new employees as 
part  of  the  standard  orientation  process,  and  providing  copies  and  updates  to  all 
managers,  supervisors,  and  human  resources  staff  at  periodic  meetings  or  equal 
employment  opportunity  training,  posting  the  procedures  in  appropriate  locations 
on the agency’s Intranet and/or on its Internet website, and making the procedures 
available  in  designated  locations  such  as  agency  libraries,  EEO  offices,  and 
personnel/human resources offices.   

(cid:131)  Where procedures are posted electronically, it may be helpful to e-mail a notice to 
all employees providing a web link to the document.  In addition, periodic e-mails to 
all  employees  or  specifically  for  managers  and  supervisors,  containing  special 
directions,  reminders,  or  updates  is  a  helpful  means  of  effectively  disseminating 
the procedures and operational advice. 

(cid:131)  As detailed throughout the prior sections of this report, appropriate training on each 
step in an agency’s procedures, and the relevant Rehabilitation Act provisions as 
interpreted in EEOC federal sector appellate decisions and in EEOC guidance, is 
critical  to  successful  implementation.    Such  training  should  be  provided  to  all 
agency staff that has any role in the reasonable accommodation process. 

38 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONCLUSION 

Written  procedures  are  an  excellent 

reasonable 
accommodation process and ensuring compliance with Section 501 of the Rehabilitation 
Act.  Many of the strategies outlined in this report will enhance agency efforts to be model 
employers  pursuant  to  29  C.F.R.  § 1604.203(a)  and  to  achieve  the  federal  sector  EEO 
goals set forth in EEOC Management Directive 715. 

for  managing 

tool 

the 

The  development  and  maintenance  of  reasonable  accommodation  procedures 
pursuant  to  E.O.  13164  is  an  ongoing  process,  in  which  agencies  will  learn  through 
practical experience what revisions may be useful, and periodically update their existing 
procedures.    With  respect  to  any  future  changes  to  agency  procedures,  the  Executive 
Order  requires  that  each  agency  or  agency  component  submit  to  the  EEOC  any 
modifications to its reasonable accommodation procedures at the time the modifications 
are  adopted.    EEOC  is  available  on  an  ongoing  basis,  however,  to  provide  technical 
assistance as requested to agencies that are contemplating revisions to their procedures.   

Submission  of  procedures  as  well  as  requests  for  technical  assistance  should  be 

directed to: 

Director, Federal Sector Programs 
Office of Federal Operations 
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
1801 L Street, N.W. 
Washington, D.C.  20507 
Telephone: (202) 663-4599 
TTY: (202) 663-4593 

July 2005 

39 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SELECTED EEOC RESOURCES ON DISABILITY ISSUES 

Policy Guidance on Exec. Order 13164:  Establishing Procedures to Facilitate the 
Provision of Reasonable Accommodation 
http://www.eeoc.gov/policy/docs/accommodation_procedures.html 

Enforcement Guidance: Reasonable Accommodation and Undue Hardship Under 
the ADA (as revised, 10/17/02) 
http://www.eeoc.gov/policy/docs/accommodation.html 

Enforcement Guidance: Disability-Related Inquiries & Medical Examinations of 
Employees Under the ADA  
http://www.eeoc.gov/policy/docs/guidance-inquiries.html 

Policy Guidance on Exec. Order 13145: To Prohibit Discrimination in Federal 
Employment Based on Genetic Information  
http://www.eeoc.gov/policy/docs/guidance-genetic.html 

Instructions for EEOC Field Offices: Analyzing ADA Charges After Supreme Court 
Decisions Addressing "Disability" and "Qualified"  
http://www.eeoc.gov/policy/docs/field-ada.html 

Enforcement Guidance on Application of the ADA to the Contingent Workers 
Placed By Temporary Agencies & Other Staffing Firms  
http://www.eeoc.gov/policy/docs/guidance-contingent.html 

Enforcement Guidance on the ADA and Psychiatric Disabilities   
http://www.eeoc.gov/policy/docs/psych.html 

Enforcement Guidance on the Effect of Representations Made in Applications for 
Benefits on the Determination of Whether a Person is a "Qualified Individual with a 
Disability" Under the ADA  
http://www.eeoc.gov/policy/docs/qidreps.html 

Enforcement Guidance: Workers' Compensation & the ADA  
http://www.eeoc.gov/policy/docs/workcomp.html 

Enforcement Guidance:  Preemployment Disability-Related Questions & Medical 
Examinations  
http://www.eeoc.gov/policy/docs/preemp.html 

Compliance Manual Section 902: Definition of the Term Disability  
http://www.eeoc.gov/policy/docs/902cm.html 

40 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Interim Enforcement Guidance on the Application of the ADA to Disability-Based 
Distinctions in Employer Provided Health Insurance  
http://www.eeoc.gov/policy/docs/health.html 

FMLA, ADA, and Title VII  
http://www.eeoc.gov/policy/docs/fmlaada.html 

Q&A:  Intellectual Disabilities in the Workplace & the ADA  
http://www.eeoc.gov/facts/intellectual_disabilities.html 

Q&A:  Epilepsy in the Workplace & the ADA  
http://www.eeoc.gov/facts/epilepsy.html  

Q&A:  Diabetes in the Workplace & the ADA  
http://www.eeoc.gov/facts/diabetes.html  

Job Applicants and the ADA  
http://www.eeoc.gov/facts/jobapplicant.html  

Telework as a Reasonable Accommodation  
http://www.eeoc.gov/facts/telework.html 

The ADA:  A Primer for Small Business 
 http://www.eeoc.gov/ada/adahandbook.html 

Obtaining and Using Employee Medical Information as Part of Emergency 
Evacuation Procedures  
http://www.eeoc.gov/facts/evacuation.html 

Interim Report on Best Practices for the Employment of People with Disabilities in 
State Government  
http://www.eeoc.gov/initiatives/nfi/int_states_best_practices_report.html  

How to Comply with the ADA: A Guide for Restaurants & Other Food Service 
Employers 
http://www.eeoc.gov/facts/restaurant_guide.html 

Q & A for Mediation Providers: Mediation and the ADA 
http://www.eeoc.gov/mediate/ada/ada_mediators.html 

Q & A for Parties to Mediation: Mediation and the ADA 
http://www.eeoc.gov/mediate/ada/ada_parties.html 

41 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ATTACHMENT A:   SAMPLE FORM 

CONFIRMATION OF REQUEST 
FOR REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION 

1. 

____________________________       
Applicant’s or Employee’s Name 

_____________________________         
Applicant’s or Employee’s Tel. No. 

Today’s Date ________________        

______________________________ 
Employee’s Office 

Date of Request ______________       

2. 

ACCOMMODATION REQUESTED. (Be as specific as possible, e.g., adaptive 
equipment, reader, interpreter) 

3. 

REASON FOR REQUEST. 

If accommodation is time sensitive, please explain: 

Return Form to Disability Program Manager 

(Disability Program Manager will assign number) 

4. 

Log No.: __________________________                              

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ATTACHMENT B:    
SAMPLE LANGUAGE REGARDING CREATION OF STAFF ASSISTANT SLOTS 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

STAFF ASSISTANT SLOTS.  The [name of federal agency] will make staff assistants 
available, if appropriate.  Staff assistants are sign language interpreters, readers, and 
assistants who perform physical tasks that an employee cannot perform because of a 
disability.  For example, an investigator with limited or no upper extremity mobility may need 
assistance in physically organizing a charge file.  The investigator will perform the essential 
functions of the position -- e.g., conduct the investigation and draft documents -- and the 
assistant would only perform the physical task. 

REQUEST FOR STAFF ASSISTANT SLOTS.  Requests for hiring a staff assistant must be 
referred to the Disability Program Manager from the staff member who received the request.  
The Disability Program Manager will first determine whether staff assistants already hired by 
the agency can fulfill an employee’s needs.  The Disability Program Manager also will 
determine if an employee’s needs could be met by contracting for services (e.g., a contract 
interpreter), and if so, will make the necessary arrangements.  If the Disability Program 
Manager approves the request to hire a staff assistant, the employee’s Office Director, in 
consultation with the Office of Human Resources, if necessary, should prepare a Request 
for Personnel Action (SF-52) and a position description.  The employee with a disability 
must play an integral part in the interview and selection process of an interpreter, reader, or 
assistant.  

USE OF STAFF ASSISTANTS.  The staff assistant slots are to be used only to hire 
interpreters, readers, and assistants as a reasonable accommodation for employees with 
disabilities.  Staff hired shall be shared to provide assistance to more than one employee 
with a disability, where appropriate.  These staff assistants may not be assigned any other 
duties unless the person they were hired to assist has no work for them to perform at that 
time.  Before assigning other duties to the assistant, the employee with the disability shall be 
consulted to determine when assistant services are not needed.  If the supervisor is not the 
employee with a disability, s/he must consult with the employee with a disability regarding 
the staff assistant’s performance evaluation.  

In no case should a staff assistant be called upon -- by management or by the employee(s) 
to whom he or she is assigned -- to perform the essential functions of the job held by the 
employee with the disability. 

HIRING AUTHORITY.  Readers, interpreters, or assistants hired to fill approved positions 
may be appointed under the non-competitive Schedule A authority, 5 C.F.R. 213.3102 (ll).  
Persons with disabilities hired as readers, interpreters, or assistants may also be hired 
under the 213.3102 (u) authority. 

RELEASE OF POSITIONS.  When the need for a staff assistant is reduced or eliminated, 
the Administrative Officer or Personnel Management Specialist shall notify the Disability 
Program Manager, who will take appropriate steps. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         DENIAL OF REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION REQUEST 

ATTACHMENT C:  SAMPLE FORM 

(Must complete numbers 1-4; complete number 5, if applies) 

1. 

2. 

Name of Individual requesting reasonable accommodation:  

Type(s) of reasonable accommodation requested: 

3.  Request for reasonable accommodation denied because (may check 

more than one box): 

_____ Accommodation Ineffective                                         
_____ Accommodation Would Cause Undue Hardship 
_____ Medical Documentation Inadequate 
_____ Accommodation Would Require  
               Removal of an Essential Function 
_____ Accommodation Would Require Lowering  
               of Performance or Production Standard 
_____ Other (Please identify)  ____________________ 

4. 

Detailed Reason(s) for the denial of reasonable accommodation (Must be 
specific, e.g., why accommodation is ineffective or causes undue 
hardship): 

5. 

If the individual proposed one type of reasonable accommodation which 
is being denied, but rejected an offer of a different type of reasonable 
accommodation, explain both the reasons for denial of the requested 
accommodation and why you believe the chosen accommodation would 
be effective. 

(Over) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
If an individual wishes to request reconsideration of this decision, s/he may 

take the following steps:    

             [outline reconsideration steps in agency procedures, e.g.: 

$ 

First, ask the decision maker to reconsider his/her denial.  Additional 
information may be presented to support this request. 

$ 

If the decision maker does not reverse the denial: 

$ 

$ 

$ 

and the decision maker was the individual’s supervisor, the 
individual can ask the Office Director to do so. 

and the decision maker was the Office Director, the individual can 
ask the Disability Program Manager to do so. 

and the decision maker was the Disability Program Manager, the 
individual can ask the official designated by the Director of the 
Equal Employment Opportunity Office to do so.] 

7. 

C 

C 

If a federal applicant or employee wishes to file an EEO complaint, or 
pursue MSPB and union grievance procedures, s/he must take the 
following steps: 

For an EEO complaint pursuant to 29 C.F.R. ' 1614, contact an EEO 

counselor in the Equal Employment Opportunity office within 45 days from the 
date of this notice of denial of reasonable accommodation; or 

For a collective bargaining claim, file a written grievance in accordance 

with the provisions of the Collective Bargaining Agreement; or 

C 

Initiate an appeal to the Merit Systems Protection Board within 30 days of an 
appealable adverse action as defined in 5 C.F.R. ' 1201.3. 

____________________________ 
Name of Deciding Official 

_____________________________ 
Signature of Deciding Official 

Date reasonable accommodation denied  _______________________________                

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ATTACHMENT D: SAMPLE FORM 
  REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION INFORMATION REPORTING FORM 
    (to be completed by the manager or other official who processed the accommodation request) 

 1. 

Reasonable accommodation: (check one) 

_____ 

Approved 

_____ 

Denied  (If denied, attach copy of the written denial 
letter/memo that was sent to individual) 

  2.  Date reasonable accommodation requested: 

Who received request: _________________________ 

  3.  Date reasonable accommodation request referred to decision maker 

(i.e., supervisor, Office Director, Disability Program Manager, Personnel 
Management Specialist): 

Name of decision maker: __________________________ 

  4.  Date reasonable accommodation approved or denied: 

  5.  Date reasonable accommodation provided (if different from date 

approved): 

  6. 

If time frames outlined in the Reasonable Accommodation Procedures 
were not met, please explain why. 

7.  Job held or desired by individual requesting reasonable accommodation 

(including occupational series, grade level, and office): 

                                                                (Over) 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
8.       Reasonable accommodation needed for: (check one)   

            Application Process 

            Performing Job Functions or Accessing the Work Environment   

            Accessing a Benefit or Privilege of Employment  (e.g., attending a           
training program or social event) 

 9. 

Type(s) of reasonable accommodation requested (e.g., adaptive 
equipment, staff assistant, removal of architectural barrier): 

10. 

Type(s) of reasonable accommodation provided (if different from what 
was requested): 

11.  Was medical information required to process this request?  If yes, 

explain why. 

12.  Sources of technical assistance, if any, consulted in trying to identify 
possible reasonable accommodations (e.g., Job Accommodation 
Network, disability organization, Disability Program Manager):  

13.  Comments: 

  Submitted by:                                                      Phone:  __________________   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
