Title
Executive Order 13164 of July 
26, 2000 Requiring Federal 
Agencies To Establish 
Procedures To Facilitate the 
Provision of Reasonable 
Accommodation

ibid

ibid

ibid

Fact

Connection

Notes

Source

7) Provide that reassignment will be considered as a reasonable 
accommodation if the agency determines that no other reasonable 
accommodation will permit the employee with a disability to perform the 
essential functions of his or her current position;

no suggestion or response regarding 
potential for reassignment. Agency did 
not respond when employee suggested 
potential options for reassignment

(8) Provide that reasonable accommodation denials be in writing and 
specify the reasons for denial;

employee was provided incorrect 
documentation on the reason for 
rejection of the rerquest.

(9) Ensure that agencies’ systems of recordkeeping track the processing
of requests for reasonable accommodation and maintain the confidentiality 
of medical information received in accordance with applicable law and 
regulations; and

system was over XXX days behind in 
responding to request. supervisor 
included direct communication with RA 
advisor 

ibid

ibid

(10) Encourage the use of informal dispute resolution processes to allow 
individuals with disabilities to obtain prompt reconsideration of denials of 
reasonable accommodation. Agencies must also inform individuals with 
disabilities that they have the right to file complaints in the Equal 
Employment Opportunity process and other statutory processes, as 
appropriate, if their requests for reasonable accommodation are denied.

employee was directed to go to 
secodary supervisor instead of EEOC 
as directed in this document

ibid

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-
2000-07-28/pdf/00-19323.pdf

ibid

ibid

ibid

Enforcement Guidance on 
Reasonable Accommodation and 
Undue Hardship under the ADA

23. How should an employer handle requests for modified or part-time 
schedules for an employee covered by both the ADA and the Family and 
Medical Leave Act (FMLA)?(67)

An employer should determine an employee's rights under each statute 
separately, and then consider whether the two statutes overlap regarding 
the appropriate actions to take.

(68)An employee receiving a part-time schedule as a reasonable 
accommodation is entitled only to the benefits, including health insurance, 
that other part-time employees receive. Thus, if non- disabled part-time 
workers are not provided with health insurance, then the employer does not 
have to provide such coverage to an employee with a disability who is 
given a part-time schedule as a reasonable accommodation.

Employer did not address potential 
reassignment.

(FOOTNOTE) 68. See infra pp. 37-45 for 
more information on reassignment, including 
under what circumstances an employer and 
employee may voluntarily agree that a transfer 
is preferable to having the employee remain in 
his/her current position

https://www.eeoc.gov/laws/guidance/enforc
ement-guidance-reasonable-
accommodation-and-undue-hardship-under-
ada#job

OTHER REASONABLE 
ACCOMMODATION ISSUES (97)

30. If an employer has provided one reasonable accommodation, does it 
have to provide additional reasonable accommodations requested by an 
individual with a disability?The duty to provide reasonable accommodation 
is an ongoing one.(98) Certain individuals require only one reasonable 
accommodation, while others may need more than one. Still others may 
need one reasonable accommodation for a period of time, and then at a 
later date, require another type of reasonable accommodation. If an 
individual requests multiple reasonable accommodations, s/he is entitled 
only to those accommodations that are necessitated by a disability and that 
will provide an equal employment opportunity.

(footnote): 98. See Ralph v. Lucent 
Technologies, Inc., 135 F.3d 166, 171, 7 AD 
Cas. (BNA) 1345, 1349 (1st Cir. 1998).

IBID

IBID

An employer must consider each request for reasonable accommodation 
and determine: (1) whether the accommodation is needed, (2) if needed, 
whether the accommodation would be effective, and (3) if effective, 
whether providing the reasonable accommodation would impose an undue 
hardship. If a reasonable accommodation turns out to be ineffective and the 
employee with a disability remains unable to perform an essential function, 
the employer must consider whether there would be an alternative 
reasonable accommodation that would not pose an undue hardship. If 
there is no alternative accommodation, then the employer must attempt to 
reassign the employee to a vacant position for which s/he is qualified, 
unless to do so would cause an undue hardship.

IBID

34. Does an employer have to allow an employee with a disability to 
work at home as a reasonable accommodation?

An employer must modify its policy concerning where work is performed if 
such a change is needed as a reasonable accommodation, but only if this 
accommodation would be effective and would not cause an undue 
hardship.(100)Whether this accommodation is effective will depend on 
whether the essential functions of the position can be performed at home. 
There are certain jobs in which the essential functions can only be 
performed at the work site -- e.g., food server, cashier in a store. For such 
jobs, allowing an employee to work at home is not effective because it does 
not enable an employee to perform his/her essential functions. Certain 
considerations may be critical in determining whether a job can be 
effectively performed at home, including (but not limited to) the employer's 
ability to adequately supervise the employee and the employee's need to 
work with certain equipment or tools that cannot be replicated at home. In 
contrast, employees may be able to perform the essential functions of 
certain types of jobs at home (e.g., telemarketer, proofreader).(101) For 
these types of jobs, an employer may deny a request to work at home if it 
can show that another accommodation would be effective or if working at 
home will cause undue hardship.

employee has successflly fulfilled their 
job for over four years as a work from 
home remotely deployed employee. No 
undue hardship was ever addressed 
prior to this.

39. Must an employer provide a reasonable accommodation that is 
needed because of the side effects of medication or treatment related 
to the disability, or because of symptoms or other medical conditions 
resulting from the underlying disability?

Yes. The side effects caused by the medication that an employee must 
take because of the disability are limitations resulting from the disability. 
Reasonable accommodation extends to all limitations resulting from a 
disability

additional side affects of the medicines 
can cause dizziniess, flushing, nausea, 
instability standing, causing employee 
to be a potential fall risk

ibid

IBID

100. See 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(1)(ii), (2)(ii) 
(1997) (modifications or adjustments to the 
manner or circumstances under which the 
position held or desired is customarily 
performed that enable a qualified individual 
with a disability to perform the essential 
functions).

101. Courts have differed regarding whether 
"work-at-home" can be a reasonable 
accommodation. Compare Langon v. 
Department of Health and Human Servs., 959 
F.2d 1053, 1060, 2 AD Cas. (BNA) 152, 159 
(D.C. Cir. 1992); Anzalone v. Allstate 
Insurance Co., 5 AD Cas. (BNA) 455, 458 
(E.D. La. 1995); Carr v. Reno, 23 F.3d 525, 
530, 3 AD Cas. (BNA) 434, 437-38 (D.D.C. 
1994), with Vande Zande v. Wisconsin Dep't 
of Admin., 44 F.3d 538, 545, 3 AD Cas. (BNA) 
1636, 1640 (7th Cir. 1995). Courts that have 
rejected working at home as a reasonable 
accommodation focus on evidence that 
personal contact, interaction, and coordination 
are needed for a specific position. See, e.g., 
Whillock v. Delta Air Lines, 926 F. Supp. 
1555, 1564, 5 AD Cas. (BNA) 1027 (N.D. Ga. 
1995), aff'd, 86 F.3d 1171, 7 AD Cas. (BNA) 
1267 (11th Cir. 1996); Misek-Falkoff v. IBM 
Corp., 854 F. Supp. 215, 227-28, 3 AD Cas. 
(BNA) 449, 457-58 (S.D.N.Y. 1994), aff'd, 60 
F.3d 811, 6 AD Cas. (BNA) 576 (2d Cir. 1995).

ibid

IBID

Undue Hardships (112)

An employer does not have to provide a reasonable accommodation that 
would cause an "undue hardship" to the employer. Generalized 
conclusions will not suffice to support a claim of undue hardship. Instead, 
undue hardship must be based on an individualized assessment of current 
circumstances that show that a specific reasonable accommodation would 
cause significant difficulty or expense.(113) A determination of undue 
hardship should be based on several factors, including:

the nature and cost of the accommodation needed;
the overall financial resources of the facility making the reasonable 
accommodation; the number of persons employed at this facility; the effect 
on expenses and resources of the facility;
the overall financial resources, size, number of employees, and type and 
location of facilities of the employer (if the facility involved in the reasonable 
accommodation is part of a larger entity);
the type of operation of the employer, including the structure and functions 
of the workforce, the geographic separateness, and the administrative or 
fiscal relationship of the facility involved in making the accommodation to 
the employer;
the impact of the accommodation on the operation of the facility.(114)

employee has successflly fulfilled their 
job for over four years as a work from 
home remotely deployed employee. No 
undue hardship was ever addressed 
prior to this.

ibid

An employer cannot claim undue hardship based on employees' (or 
customers') fears or prejudices toward the individual's disability.(117) Nor 
can undue hardship be based on the fact that provision of a reasonable 
accommodation might have a negative impact on the morale of other 
employees. Employers, however, may be able to show undue hardship 
where provision of a reasonable accommodation would be unduly 
disruptive to other employees's ability to work.

employee has been grossly guilted 
throughout this request process which 
has seemed to be more leaning on the 
employee's ability to work through the 
legalities without FEMA's proper 
engagement in the process

ibid

IBID

Burdens of Proof

In US Airways, Inc. v. Barnett, 535 U.S., 122 S. Ct. 1516 (2002), the 
Supreme Court laid out the burdens of proof for an individual with a 
disability (plaintiff) and an employer (defendant) in an ADA lawsuit alleging 
failure to provide reasonable accommodation. The "plaintiff/employee (to 
defeat a defendant/employer's motion for summary judgment) need only 
show that an 'accommodation' seems reasonable on its face, i.e., ordinarily 
or in the run of cases."(125) Once the plaintiff has shown that the 
accommodation s/he needs is "reasonable," the burden shifts to the 
defendant/employer to provide case-specific evidence proving that 
reasonable accommodation would cause an undue hardship in the 
particular circumstances.(126)

The Supreme Court's burden-shifting framework does not affect the 
interactive process triggered by an individual's request for 
accommodation.(127) An employer should still engage in this informal 
dialogue to obtain relevant information needed to make an informed 
decision.

employee has repeatedly been the only 
party expected to shoulder the burden 
of both the disability and the research 
needed for accomodation

ibid

Constructive Discharge/Forced 
To Resign

Discriminatory practices under the laws EEOC enforces also include 
constructive discharge or forcing an employee to resign by making the work 
environment so intolerable a reasonable person would not be able to stay.

employee has been encouraged to 
apply to other positions and/or accept 
no accomodation in order to keep 
position

This is not only in direct violation of EEOC, 
this is also an undue hardship on the 
EMPLOYEE because it has caused stress, 
anxierty, and negatively impacted the health 
and welleness of the employee.

https://www.eeoc.gov/prohibited-
employment-policiespractices

FEMA MANUAL FM 123-6-1  
REASONABLE 
ACCOMMODATION PROGRAM 
APPROVAL DATE: 01/28/2015 

E. Undue Hardship: FEMA must provide Reasonable Accommodation for a 
disability unless it would cause significant difficulty or expense.  
Determination of undue hardship is always made on a case-by-case basis, 
considering factors that include the nature and cost of the Reasonable 
Accommodation and the impact of the Reasonable Accommodation on the 
operations of the Agency including the impact on the ability of others to 

pg 5

https://www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/2020
-03/reasonable-accommodation-
policy_2020.pdf

Instruction 256-022-01:  
Reasonable Accommodation 
Program January 2022 

41 An individual with a disability may request a reasonable accommodation 
whenever they choose, even if they have not previously disclosed the 
existence of a disability. However, there may be limitations on the agency’s 
ability to provide a requested accommodation at a specific time if 
insufficient notice is provided.  Therefore, agency employees should 
request accommodations as soon as practicable after the need for such 
assistance becomes known

Employee has attempted to receive an 
RA for over 400 days.

pg 6

https://www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/docu
ments/fema_reasonable-accommodation-
policy.pdf

JOB OFFER

JOB OFFER

You have been tentatively selected to fill the Emergency Management 
Specialist (Recovery) position advertised as FEMA-23-TBH-682147-
COREwith the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), Federal 
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA),
Regional Offices, Region Six, Recovery Division, Public Assistance Branch 
located in Bellville, Texas. The offer details are as follows (see offer)

Employee's offer specifically lists 
brance located in BELLVILLE,TEXAS
offer does not deferentiate between in 
person and virtual deployement

FEMA provides Reasonable Accommodation(s) to qualified employees and 
applicants with disabilities. Reasonable
Accommodation requests are granted on a case-by-case basis. Medical 
documentation may be requested if the
disability is not obvious. If you would like to request an accommodation, 
please contact the Office of Equal
Rights at FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation@fema.dhs.gov, at your 
earliest convenience.

1ST page notes reasonable 
accomodation information, which 
employee IMMEDIATELY addressed

qu

What does "Undue Hardship" 
mean? - A Deconstructive Series 
for ADA Terminology

An employer does not have to provide a reasonable accommodation that 
would cause an "undue hardship" to the employer. Generalized 
conclusions will not suffice to support a claim of undue hardship. Instead, 
undue hardship must be based on an individualized assessment of current 
circumstances that show that a specific reasonable accommodation would 
cause significant difficulty or expense. A determination of undue hardship 
should be based on several factors, including:

the nature and cost of the accommodation needed;
the overall financial resources of the facility making the reasonable 
accommodation; the number of persons employed at this facility; the effect 
on expenses and resources of the facility;
the overall financial resources, size, number of employees, and type and 
location of facilities of the employer (if the facility involved in the reasonable 
accommodation is part of a larger entity);
the type of operation of the employer, including the structure and functions 
of the workforce, the geographic separateness, and the administrative or 
fiscal relationship of the facility involved in making the accommodation to 
the employer;
the impact of the accommodation on the operation of the facility.

direct supervisor did not priovide 
specific details regarding the undue 
hardship. Instead,  supervisor ignored 
the direction of the law and simply 
stated employee's solution could not be 
accepted. No mention of virtual 
deployment is mentioned, though 
employee has been virtually deployed 
for over 4 years. Finally, supervisor only 
explained how the employee would 
directly an undue hardship. 

https://askjan.org/articles/Undue-Hardship-
is-a-Process.cfm

