DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 

REMOTE WORK APPLICATION AND AGREEMENT

1. Check one of the following:

New Agreement

Change in Existing Agreement

2. Employee Name

4. Position Title

6. Supervisor (Name/Title)

3. Organization

5. Series and Grade

7. Supervisor Phone Number

PART I. COMPLETION OF THIS AGREEMENT INDICATES THAT:

1.   The employee certifies that they are eligible for remote work arrangements and their Official Personnel Folder does not contain 

documentation of either: 

a.) An absence without leave for more than five days in a calendar year; or

b.) A violation of Subpart G of the Standards of Ethical Conduct of Employees of the Executive Branch for viewing, downloading, 
or exchanging pornography, including child pornography, on a Federal Government computer or while performing official 
Federal Government duties.

2.   The employee acknowledges that if they are determined to be ineligible for remote work after the enactment of this agreement:

a.) Both they and FEMA have a legal obligation to cease working under the terms of this remote work agreement; and 

b.) If the employee is offered the choice of working from their Agency Worksite, they are ineligible for relocation reimbursement 

from FEMA.

3.   Employee volunteers to participate in the remote work program and to adhere to the applicable guidelines and policies. Agency 

concurs with employee participation and agrees to the applicable guidelines and policies.

4.   Employee's FEMA mobile phone number is:

5.   Employee’s Agency Worksite is:

6.   Employee's official duty station/Remote Worksite is (City, State):

for purposes such as pay, etc.

7.   The address of the employee's Remote Worksite is:

Number, Street, City, State, Zip Code

Number, Street, City, State, Zip Code

8.   The location within the Remote Worksite where the employee will work is: 

9.   Employee’s Remote Worksite internet service provider is:

10. Is internet service active at Remote Worksite now? 

Yes

No

If No, what is the scheduled date of activation?

11. Employee certifies that their Remote Worksite is eligible for this remote work arrangement and is supported by sufficient and 

reliable (e.g., not telephone line dial-up) internet service to support their effective remote working using FEMA on-line 
collaborations tools.

12. Employee understands requirements for a safe and healthy Remote Worksite and office space and that these requirements must 

be met.

13. Employee understands that when remote working the employee is required to satisfactorily complete all assigned work, 

consistent with the approach adopted for all other employees in their work group.

14. The employee will regularly meet/speak with the supervisor to receive assignments and to review completed work as necessary 
or appropriate. The employee's job performance will be evaluated on criteria and milestones determined by the supervisor with 
input from the employee.

FEMA Form FF-403-FY-22-112 (6/22)

Page 1 of 3

15. Employee's Time and Attendance (WebTA) for all official duty time spent working from their Remote Worksite will be recorded as 
“Regular Base Pay.” The supervisor and employee are responsible for ensuring the accuracy of time and attendance reported for 
the employee's work at the Remote Worksite. The supervisor agrees to certify biweekly the employee's Time and Attendance 
Daily Report for hours worked.

16. Employee agrees to participate in surveys and data calls relative to the FEMA Remote Work Program, as requested.

17. The employee must obtain supervisory approval before taking leave in accordance with established office procedures and  

FEMA's Absence and Leave policies. Use of sick leave, annual leave, or other leave credits must be approved in advance by the 
supervisor. Overtime must be approved in advance by the supervisor.

18. Employee will utilize Government-issued equipment for official business only and in accordance with applicable laws, 

regulations, policies, etc., as well as safeguard said equipment.

19. Employee is solely responsible for servicing and maintaining employee-owned equipment (e.g., internet modem, wireless router, 

etc.).

20. Employee is covered under the Federal Employees Compensation Act while performing official duties at their Remote Worksite. 
Any accident or injury which occurs at the Remote Worksite while performing official duties must be brought immediately to the 
attention of the supervisor.

21. Employee understands that remote work is not a substitute for dependent care (childcare or elder care) and that appropriate 

arrangements, including use of an alternate or flexible work schedule in accordance with FEMA's Scheduling of Work policies, 
must be made to accommodate children and adults who cannot care for themselves while employee performs their official duties 
at their Remote Worksite.

22. The employee understands that the Government will not be responsible for any operating costs that are associated with the use 
of the employee's residence as a Remote Worksite, including (but not limited to): home maintenance, insurance, reliable and 
adequate internet connectivity, or other utilities.

23. Employee will apply approved safeguards to protect Government records from unauthorized disclosure or damage and will 

comply with the provisions set forth in the Privacy Act of 1974, Public Act of 1974, Public Law 93-579, codified at Title 5, U.S.C., 
Section 55a.

24. The employee agrees to abide by the Department of Homeland Security and FEMA Standards of Ethical Conduct Standards 

while on official duty and working from their Remote Worksite.

25. The employee and supervisor will review and revise (as needed) this Remote Work Agreement on an annual basis.

26. The employee may request to terminate this remote work agreement with or without cause, at the employee's own expense, 

without adverse employment consequences, provided that the employee must be able to perform the essential functions of their 
position at their Official Worksite/former Agency Worksite.

27. The supervisor may terminate the remote work agreement for the convenience of the Agency with reasonable advance notice, 
generally 30 calendar days, and require the employee to resume working at their Official Worksite/former Agency Worksite or 
other FEMA facility, and will notify the employee if they are eligible for any relocation expense reimbursement.

28. Employee understands that the supervisor must terminate the remote work agreement if either the employee or their Remote 
Worksite become ineligible in violation of this remote work agreement, and that the employee will not be eligible for any 
relocation reimbursement if that occurs.

29. Reasons for termination of this remote work agreement will be documented by the supervisor and must not be for employee 

performance or misconduct, in accordance with FEMA policy.

The employee's failure to comply with the terms of this agreement may result in the termination of this agreement and the remote 
work arrangement. Failure to comply with the provisions of this agreement may also result in appropriate disciplinary or adverse 
action against the employee.

COMPLIANCE WITH THIS AGREEMENT

By signing this agreement, the employee certifies that (s)he has read the terms of this agreement and agrees to follow the policies 
and procedures outlined in them as well as all other applicable regulations, policies, and procedures.

PART II. CERTIFICATION

Employee's Signature

Title

Date

FEMA Form FF-403-FY-22-112 (6/22)

Page 2 of 3

Your request to participate in the remote work program is:

Approved as written

Approved with the following modification(s):

PART III. APPROVAL/DISAPPROVAL

Disapproved for the following reason(s):

The employee's position is no longer suitable for remote work arrangements in this Program Office.

The employee's proposed Remote Worksite does not meet prescribed acceptability standards. (State the specific deficiency 
issue(s), such as: safety, insufficient internet access, ability to access required materials, insufficient IT security, or non-work-
related distractions and/or obligations.) 

Other (please specify in the comments section below):

Remote Work Start Date*:

Enter the date the employee will begin remote working from the Remote Worksite noted above. If left blank, the employee’s remote 
work will begin on the date the RWAA signed this agreement.

Supervisor's Signature

Title

Remote Work Approving Authority's Signature

Title

Remote Work Coordinator's Signature

Title

Date

Date

Date

*Per FEMA Manual 403-21-001, the effective date for remote work is the date signed by the RWAA and this date will be used as the effective date for 
personnel action. Use the “Remote Work Start Date” field if the remote work will begin later than the date the agreement was signed by the RWAA. 

The RWAA signature date or Remote Work Start Date (whichever is later) will be used as the effective date for any required personnel action(s) – if 
the date does not align with the beginning of a pay-period, OCHCO will set the effective date as the first day in the next pay-period.

FEMA Form FF-403-FY-22-112 (6/22)

Page 3 of 3

