Guide for Managers/Supervisors on FEMA’s Reasonable Accommodation Process 

Fact Sheet 

This fact sheet is provided as a quick reference guide for managers and supervisors regarding 
the  provision  of  reasonable  accommodations.  This  document  does  not  replace  FEMA’s 
reasonable accommodation policy (see Resources at end of this document), nor does it address 
all  questions  or  situations.  For  specific  information  not  covered  herein,  please  consult  the 
reasonable accommodation policy or contact the Office of Equal Rights (OER) Disability Division 
– FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation@fema.dhs.gov.

Introduction 
The Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended, protects qualified employees and applicants for 
employment  with  disabilities  from  employment  discrimination  based  on  a  disability,  in  the 
federal government.  The law makes it illegal to discriminate against a qualified person with a 
disability, and the law makes it illegal to retaliate against a person because the person requests 
an accommodation.  The law also requires that FEMA provide a reasonable accommodation for 
the known physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability, 
unless doing so causes an undue hardship.  

What is a Reasonable Accommodation? 
A reasonable accommodation is a change or modification to the work environment or the way 
things  are  customarily  done,  including  a  change  or  modification  to  a  particular  office  policy 
and/or  procedures, which would  enable  a  qualified  individual  with  a  disability  to  apply  for a 
position, perform the essential functions of a position, and/or, enjoy the benefits and privileges 
of  employment  equal  to  those  enjoyed  by  employees  without  disabilities.    Reasonable 
accommodations do not allow an employee to be excused from the essential functions of their 
position.  Typical  reasonable  accommodations  include  leave,  a  schedule  adjustment,  an 
interpreter, etc.  Importantly, sometimes an accommodation might be a change to your style or 
practices as a manager/supervisor.   

Who is a person with a disability? 
A  person  with  a  disability  is  an  individual  who  has  a  physical  or  mental  impairment  that 
substantially  limits  one  or  more  major  life  activities;  a  record  of  such  an  impairment;  or  is 
regarded as having such an impairment.  Only individuals with a physical or mental impairment 
are entitled to a reasonable accommodation; individuals who have a record of an impairment 
that is no longer limiting them in a major life activity are not entitled to an accommodation.   

Federal Emergency Management Agency 
A detailed explanation of the above definition can be found by following the link to a fact sheet 
produced by the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC).  Additionally, OER 
has an informative webinar for managers/supervisors, on this topic. 

Briefly, major life activities include but are not limited to breathing, walking, learning, seeing, 
and hearing.  An impairment is considered substantially limiting if it significantly restricts – or 
prevents  altogether  –  an  individual's  ability  to  perform  the  activity  as  compared  with  the 
average person. 

A  qualified  individual  with  a  disability  is  defined  as  one  who:  (1)  satisfies  the  requisite  skill, 
experience, education, and other job-related requirements of the position; and (2) can perform 
the essential functions of the position, with or without reasonable accommodation.  

How does an employee or applicant for employment request a reasonable accommodation? 
An  employee  may  request  a  reasonable  accommodation  orally  or  in  writing  from  his/her 
supervisor of record (SOR), by contacting OER, or by initiating the process through the DHS 
Accessibility Compliance Reporting System (ACMS).  The request should be documented on 
FEMA Form 256-0-1 , Request for Reasonable Accommodation.  Though not required to use 
any specific words or format for the request, the requestor is responsible for notifying his/her 
SOR of the need for an accommodation, providing sufficient information to establish that they 
are an individual with a disability, and describing the limitations they encounter that require 
accommodating.  An applicant for employment may request a reasonable accommodation 
orally or in writing from any FEMA employee with whom she/he has contact, in connection 
with  the  application  process.  The  FEMA  employee  with  whom  the  applicant  makes  their 
request should notify the Disability Program Manager (DPM) in OER as soon as they become 
aware  of  the  request.  An  applicant  for  employment  may  also  request  reasonable 
accommodation directly from the DPM. 

How do I recognize a request as one for a reasonable accommodation(s)? 
Reasonable accommodation requests take many forms.  There is no one required method.  
Supervisors  must  be  mindful  that  an  applicant  or  employee  may  indicate  a  need  for 
adjustment or change in an application process or express a need for a modification at work 
for a reason related to a medical condition, as a means to initiating the process.  Requests do 
not have to be in writing, and do not have to include the terms "reasonable accommodation," 
“Rehabilitation Act”, or "disability."  Ex. “I need a new chair, as this one is exacerbating my 
back condition,” is enough to trigger further discussion.   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 

How do I respond to a request for a Reasonable Accommodation (RA)? 
Listen, ask relevant questions, review the RA policy and consult with OER.  Importantly, do 
not automatically refuse an accommodation request.   

•  Review  each  request  individually.  There  is  no  one-size-fits-all  accommodation. 
Accommodations may differ based on the employee's medical condition, medical 
treatment and job duties.   

•  Discuss the request with the employee or applicant for employment.   

•  Ask for additional information if needed to help you determine if the individual is a 
qualified  individual  with  a  disability,  and  if  so,  what  type(s)  of  accommodations 
might be effective for both the individual and FEMA.  For example, if an employee 
who is partially blind requests special computer software, you may want to discuss 
what types of software would meet his/her needs. 

•  Consider alternative accommodations. If it is not possible to provide the requested 
accommodation, determine whether other accommodations would be effective.  

•  Consider additional requests.  Remember that medical conditions can change.  An 
employee may need an additional accommodation or a different accommodation at 
some point in the future, due to changes in job responsibilities, medical condition or 
medical treatment. 

•  Reassignment as a last resort.  Reassignment is a “last resort” accommodation that 
must be considered if there are no effective accommodations that would enable an 
employee to perform the essential functions of his/her current job, or if all other 
possible accommodations would impose undue hardship on FEMA.  Reassignment 
is  available  only  to  employees;  it  is  not  available  to  applicants.  In  addition, 
reassignment  may  be  made  only  to  a  vacant,  funded  position.    In  considering 
whether  there  are  positions  available  for  reassignment,  the  Office  of  the  Chief 
Component  Human  Capital  Officer  (OCCHCO)  and  the  individual  requesting  the 
accommodation  will  work  together  to  identify:  (1)  vacant  positions  within  the 
agency  for  which  the  employee  may  be  qualified,  with  or  without  reasonable 
accommodation; and (2) positions which OCCHCO has reason to believe will become 
vacant over the next 60 business days and for which the employee may be qualified. 
The agency will first focus on positions that are equivalent to the employee’s current 
job in terms of pay, status, and other relevant factors. If there is no vacant equivalent 
position, FEMA will consider vacant lower level positions for which the individual is 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 

qualified.    Reassignment  may  be  made  to  a  vacant  position  outside  of  the 
employee’s  commuting  area  if  the  employee  is  willing  to  relocate.  As  with  other 
transfers  not  required  by  management,  FEMA  will  not  pay  for  the  employee’s 
relocation  costs.  In  the  event  that  a  vacant  position  is  not  available,  FEMA  will 
expand its search for vacancies at other DHS components. 

How is a decision reached regarding a request for a reasonable accommodation? 
FEMA  is  required  to  initiate  an  interactive  discussion  with  individuals  who  request  an 
accommodation.    It  is  through  this  discussion  that  the  SOR  learns  about  the  employee’s 
limitations  and  types  of  accommodations  which  would  be  the  most  effective  to  enable  the 
employee to perform the essential functions of his/her job.  The SOR may consult with OER, if 
assistance is needed. The final decision rests with the SOR; however, a SOR may not issue a 
denial without the concurrence of OER.   Once decided, the SOR must meet with the employee 
to discuss the decision and provide them the decision in writing.  Once issued, a copy of the 
decision must be forwarded to OER.   

What is an undue hardship? 
FEMA has a legal duty to provide an effective accommodation, unless doing so will result in an 
undue hardship to the agency.  An undue hardship may include significant difficulty or expense, 
changing fundamental job duties, lowering production or performance standards or tolerating 
misconduct.  Most accommodations, however, are not expensive; in fact, some are free!  Please 
note  that  proof  one accommodation  poses  an  undue  hardship  does  not  absolve FEMA  from 
considering alternatives.   

When should medical documentation be provided? 
If  the  disability  and/or  limitations  are  not  obvious,  managers/supervisors  should  request 
medical information to substantiate that the individual has a disability and clarify the limitations 
that require accommodating.  Medical documentation will be considered sufficient if it meets 
the following criteria: 

•  Describes the nature, severity, and duration of the individual's impairment,  
•  The activity or activities that the impairment limits,  
•  The  extent  to  which  the  impairment  limits  the  individual’s  ability  to  perform  said 

activity or activities; and,  

•  Substantiates why the requested reasonable accommodation is needed. 

Medical documentation about the individual’s disability and functional limitations must come 
from a qualified health care or rehabilitation professional.  Depending on the disability and the 
type of functional limitation it imposes, qualified professionals could be doctors, psychiatrists, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
psychologists, nurses, physical therapists, occupational therapists, speech therapists, vocational 
rehabilitation 
Importantly, 
managers/supervisors are not entitled to an employee’s entire medical history.  Inquiries should 
be limited to information that explains the limitation and need for accommodation.  If unsure, 
consult OER for guidance.   

licensed  mental  health  professionals. 

specialists,  or 

Additionally, please note that some employees are not comfortable sharing information about 
their  physical  or  mental  impairment  with  their  first-line  supervisor.    It  is  permissible  for  an 
employee to instead submit the requested medical information directly with OER.  OER will then 
work with the SOR to make the appropriate decision. 

How do I protect the confidentiality of an employee with a disability? 
Under  the  Rehabilitation  Act,  a  person’s  medical  condition,  functional  limitations,  and 
information about the fact that an accommodation has been requested or provided must be 
kept confidential.  Therefore, information regarding an employee’s reasonable accommodation 
should only be shared with those persons having a need to know. This generally includes a first 
and/or second line supervisor and OER.  It does not include fellow employees, even if they may 
be asked to assume some non-essential functions as part of accommodating another employee.  

Additionally, under the Rehabilitation Act, medical information obtained in connection with the 
reasonable  accommodation  process  must  be  kept  confidential,  in  files  separate  from  the 
individual’s personnel file.  Medical documents provided by an employee should be sent to OER 
and  should  be  password  protected.    Managers  should  not  keep  copies  of  medical  records.  
Please email medical documentation to FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation@fema.dhs.gov . 

OER may share certain information with an employee’s supervisor or other agency official(s) 
as necessary to make appropriate determinations on a reasonable accommodation request. 
Under  these  circumstances,  OER  will  inform  the  recipients  about  these  confidentiality 
requirements.  The  information  disclosed  will  be  no  more  than  is  necessary  to  process  the 
request.  

Are all employees entitled to a reasonable accommodation?   
No. Only qualified individuals with a disability are entitled to an accommodation. 

Does the agency have to provide the accommodation requested? 
No.  FEMA does not have to provide the specific accommodation requested.  Employees are not 
entitled  to  the  accommodation  of  their  choice.  Employees  are  entitled  to  an  effective 
accommodation.      If  more  than  one  accommodation  is  effective,  the  employer  may  choose 
which one to provide.   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 

What are the applicable processing timeframes?   
to  process  a  reasonable 
Generally,  managers/supervisors  have  15  business  days 
accommodation request.  The time required to process a request for accommodation can vary 
because  of  factors  such  as  the  need  to  clarify  requests,  obtain  the  necessary  supporting 
documentation,  and  the  availability  of  all  parties  involved.    FEMA  processes  all  reasonable 
accommodation  request  as  expeditiously  as  possible.    If  you  need  assistance  processing  a 
request, please contact OER.   

Importantly, unjustified delay in responding to or processing a request has been determined to 
be a violation of the Rehab Act.  As such, managers/supervisors need to act with all deliberate 
haste. 

When is a decision reached? 
Upon  evaluating  all  recommendations,  considering  available  resources,  and  engaging  in  the 
interactive process with the requestor, the SOR will make a final determination of approval or 
denial on the request.  In the event of a denial, the Office of Equal Rights must be consulted 
prior to issuance.  The decision maker is required to discuss the decision with the employee, 
and document their decision in writing.  Once issued, a copy of the decision must be forwarded 
to OER.   

What is the appeal process? 
An employee or applicant for employment who has requested reasonable accommodation may 
request prompt reconsideration of a denial of reasonable accommodation.  

•  If an employee is denied his/her request for reasonable accommodation, he/she may 
appeal  directly  to  his/her  second  level  supervisor.  The  employee  may  present 
additional information in support of his/her request. The second level supervisor will 
respond to this request within ten (10) business days of receipt of the request.  

•  If  an  applicant  for  employment 

is  denied  his/her  request  for  reasonable 
accommodation, he/she may appeal directly to the Director, OER. The applicant may 
present additional information in support of his/her request. The Director will respond 
to this request within ten (10) business days of receipt of the request. 

•  In an effort to resolve disputes arising out of a request for reasonable accommodation, 
employees or applicants for employment can also request to participate in the OER 
Alternative Dispute Resolution process. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 

What is the role of the Office of Equal Rights in the reasonable accommodation process? 
OER’s  role  is  to  assist  managers  with  the  timely  processing  of  reasonable  accommodation 
requests, consistent with all relevant statutes, regulations, EEOC guidance, case law, and the 
FEMA Reasonable Accommodation Policy.   In that regard OER provides neutral, authoritative 
guidance to managers/supervisors and employees on the RA process.  When applicable, OER 
may forward a request for reasonable accommodation to Federal Occupational Health (FOH) to 
obtain a medical review of the employee’s request for an accommodation.  OER is a neutral 
party in the RA process and FOH is a medical reviewing authority.  Neither OER nor FOH approves 
or denies RA requests, except in cases of a final appeal.   

In  OER,  a  Reasonable  Accommodation  Specialist  may  conduct  an  analysis  of  whether  an 
employee is an individual with a disability.  Ultimately, the manager makes the decision.   

FEMA components may designate a qualified management official to facilitate the reasonable 
accommodation process.  The designation of such a facilitator does not replace OER’s role in the 
reasonable  accommodation  process  or  preclude  employees  from  communicating  with  OER 
directly on reasonable accommodation matters. 

For  guidance  and/or  assistance  with  any  reasonable  accommodation  inquiry,  please  contact 
OER at FEMA-reasonable-accomodation@fema.dhs.gov. 

Resources: 

• FEMA Reasonable Accommodation Policy
• FEMA Form 256-0-1 Request for Reasonable Accommodation Form
• Job Accommodation Network (JAN) – provides general guidance on the

Rehabilitation Act and A-Z disabilities and accommodations.
• Office of Equal Rights Reasonable Accommodation intranet site
• EEOC Enforcement Guidance on Reasonable Accommodation and Undue Hardship

Under the Americans with Disabilities Act

• The Rehabilitation Act of 1973

 
