DDEEPPAARRTTMMEENNTT  OOFF  HHOOMMEELLAANNDD  SSEECCUURRIITTYY  

PPRROOCCEEDDUURREESS  TTOO  FFAACCIILLIIAATTEE  TTHHEE  

PPRROOVVIISSIIOONN  OOFF    

RREEAASSOONNAABBLLEE  AACCCCOOMMMMOODDAATTIIOONN  

DDiirreeccttoorr,,  OOffffiiccee  ffoorr  CCiivviill  RRiigghhttss  aanndd  CCiivviill  LLiibbeerrttiieess  
DDeeppaarrttmmeenntt  ooff  HHoommeellaanndd  SSeeccuurriittyy  
WWaasshhiinnggttoonn,,  DDCC    2200552288  

 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
 
 
Table of Contents 

Purpose ..................................................................................................................1 

Authority ...............................................................................................................1 

Policy......................................................................................................................1 

Scope ......................................................................................................................2 

Background ...........................................................................................................2 

Definitions..............................................................................................................3 

Requesting Reasonable Accommodation ...........................................................6 

THE REQUEST ............................................................................................................................................................6 
WRITTEN CONFIRMATIONS........................................................................................................................................6 
THE INTERACTIVE PROCESS ......................................................................................................................................7 
DETERMINING WHO WILL HANDLE THE REQUEST ....................................................................................................7 
REASSIGNMENT AS AN ACCOMMODATION.................................................................................................................8 
REQUESTS FOR MEDICAL INFORMATION ...................................................................................................................9 
TIME FRAMES ..........................................................................................................................................................11 
EXPEDITED PROCESSING..........................................................................................................................................15 

Granting or Denying a Reasonable Accommodation Request.......................16 

GRANTING A REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION REQUEST........................................................................................16 
DENIAL OF REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION REQUEST...........................................................................................16 

Dispute Resolution..............................................................................................18 

Confidentiality and Disclosure ..........................................................................19 

Information Tracking and Reporting ..............................................................20 

Relation of Procedures to Statutory and Collective Bargaining Claims.......22 

EEO COMPLAINT.....................................................................................................................................................22 
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING CLAIM ...........................................................................................................................22 
MSPB APPEAL ........................................................................................................................................................22 

Responsibilities ...................................................................................................23 

Appendices 

APPENDIX A:  REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION REQUEST FORM ......................................................................... A-1 
APPENDIX B:  CONFIRMATION FORM.....................................................................................................................B-1 
APPENDIX C:  REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION REQUEST FORM ..........................................................................C-1 
APPENDIX D:  ANNUAL REPORT FORM ................................................................................................................. D-1 

 
 
Purpose 

The following implements Executive Order 13164 by establishing requirements for processing 
requests for reasonable accommodation and, where appropriate, for providing reasonable 
accommodation to employees and applicants with disabilities. 

Authority 

The Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C 701), as amended, requires an employer to provide 
reasonable accommodation to qualified individuals with disabilities who are employees or 
applicants for employment, except when such accommodation would cause undue hardship. 

Executive Order 13164, Requiring Federal Agencies to Establish Procedures to Facilitate the 
Provision of Reasonable Accommodation (July 26, 2000), requires that  Federal agencies 
establish effective written procedures for processing requests for reasonable accommodation. 

Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Policy Guidance on Executive Order 13164, 
Establishing Procedures to Facilitate the Provision of Reasonable Accommodation, No. 915-003 
(October 20, 2000), explains EO 13164 in detail. 

Equal Employment Opportunity Enforcement Guidance on Reasonable Accommodation and 
Undue Hardship under the American's with Disabilities Act (March 1, 1999) clarifies the rights 
and responsibilities of employers and individuals with disabilities regarding reasonable 
accommodation and undue hardship. 

                                                                                                                                               The 
Department of Homeland Security (DHS) is committed to providing reasonable accommodation 
to employees and applicants for employment in order to assure that individuals with disabilities 
enjoy full access to equal employment opportunity (EEO).   

Policy            

DHS shall provide reasonable accommodation for the known physical or mental limitations of 
qualified employees and applicants with disabilities, unless DHS can demonstrate that a 
particular accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the operation of its programs. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
Scope 

The policies and procedures contained herein apply to all DHS organizational elements and to all 
employees and applicants for employment with the Department and its organizational elements 
and offices  These policies and procedures supplement the Equal Employment Opportunity 
Commission (EEOC) Enforcement Guidance on Reasonable Accommodation and Undue 
Hardship Under the Americans with Disabilities Act (March 1, 1999), and EEOC Policy 
Guidance on Executive Order 13164, Establishing Procedures to Facilitate the Provision of 
Reasonable Accommodation (October 20, 2000).  Both documents are available on EEOC's 
internet site at www.eeoc.gov).   

Background 

The Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C 701), as amended, was the first national law to address 
employment protection for individuals with disabilities.  In part, the Act required an employer to 
provide reasonable accommodation to qualified individuals with disabilities who are employees 
or applicants for employment, except when such accommodation would cause undue hardship. 

The EEOC issued enforcement guidance on March 1, 1999, which clarifies the rights and 
responsibilities of employers and individuals with disabilities regarding reasonable 
accommodation and undue hardship. 

On July 26, 2000, Executive Order (EO) 13164 was signed.  The EO required that Federal 
agencies establish effective written procedures for processing requests for reasonable 
accommodation.  The EO did not create any new enforceable rights for Executive branch 
employees or applicants for employment. 

On October 20, 2000, EEOC issued policy guidance that further explains the effects of the EO 
13164. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Definitions 

Decision-maker.  An individual who has authority to determine whether a requested 
accommodation will be provided. 

Department.  Department of Homeland Security, including its subordinate organizational 
elements and offices. 

Disability.  An impairment that substantially limits one or more of the major life activities. 

Dispute Resolution Process.  Any voluntary mechanism through which an individual can 
request reconsideration of denial of reasonable accommodation, regardless of whether the person 
has started the EEO complaint process. 

Essential Function.  Those job duties that are so fundamental to the position that the individual 
holds or desires that he/she cannot do the job without performing them.  A function can be 
"essential" if, among other things:  the position exists specifically to perform that function; there 
are a limited number of other employees who could perform the function; or the function is 
specialized and the individual is hired based on his/her ability to perform them.  Determination 
of the essential functions of a position must be done on a case-by-case basis so that it reflects the 
job as actually performed, and not simply the components of a generic position description. 

Extenuating Circumstances.   Factors that could not reasonably have been anticipated or 
avoided in advance of the request for accommodation.  Limited situations in which unforeseen or 
unavoidable events prevent prompt processing and delivery of an accommodation.  For example, 
processing a request for reasonable accommodation or providing an accommodation may not be 
delayed because a particular staff member is unavailable.  

Individual with a Disability.  A person who has a physical or mental impairment that 
substantially limits one or more of that person's major life activities, has a record of impairment, 
or is regarded as having such an impairment. 

Interactive Process.  The process by which the individual requesting an accommodation and the 
Decision-maker talk to each other about the request for accommodation, the process for 
determining whether an accommodation will be provided, and potential accommodations. 

Major Life Activity.  Basic activities that the average person in the general population can 
perform with little or no difficulty, such as caring for oneself, performing manual tasks, walking, 
seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning and working. 

Organizational Element.   Any bureau, office, service or other component of the DHS. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Qualified Individual with a Disability.  An individual with a disability who satisfies the 
requisite skill, experience, education, and other job-related requirements of the employment 
position such individual holds or desires, and who, with or without reasonable accommodation, 
can perform the essential functions of such position. 

Reasonable Accommodation.  An adjustment or alteration that enables a qualified person with a 
disability to apply for a job, perform job duties, or enjoy benefits and privileges of employment.  
There are three categories of reasonable accommodations: 

•  modifications or adjustments to a job application process to permit an individual with 

a disability to be considered for a job (such as providing application forms in 
alternative formats like large print or Braille); 

•  modifications or adjustments to enable a qualified individual with a disability to 
perform the essential functions of the job (such as providing sign language 
interpreters); and 

•  modifications or adjustments that enable employees with disabilities to enjoy equal 
benefits and privileges of employment (such as removing physical barriers in an 
organization's criteria). 

Reassignment.  A form of reasonable accommodation that, absent undue hardship, is provided 
to employees (not applicants) who, because of a disability, can no longer perform the essential 
functions of their job, with or without reasonable accommodation.  Reassignments are made only 
to vacant positions and to employees who are qualified for the new position.  If the employee is 
qualified for the position, he/she will be reassigned to the job and will not have to compete. 

Receiving Officials.  The officials designated to officially receive a request for reasonable 
accommodation from an employee or applicant (or an individual acting on his/her behalf), 
determine who will handle the request (the Decision-maker), and monitor the request until it is 
closed out.  Typically this is the employee’s immediate supervisor; another supervisor or 
manager in the employee’s immediate chain of command; the Equal Employment Opportunity 
(EEO) office; any other office designated to oversee the reasonable accommodation process; in 
connection with the application process, any agency employee with whom the applicant has 
contact in connection with the application process; or any other individual designated by the 
organizational element. 

Request for Reasonable Accommodation.  A statement that an individual needs an adjustment 
or change at work, in the application process, or in a benefit or privilege of employment for a 
reason related to a medical condition. 

Requester.  A qualified employee or applicant with a disability, or an individual acting on 
his/her behalf, who requests reasonable accommodation. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Undue Hardship.  An action requiring significant difficulty or expense when considered in light 
of factors such as the agency's size, financial resources, and the nature and structure of the 
position.  Determination of undue hardship is always made on a case-by-case basis, considering 
factors that include the nature and cost of the reasonable accommodation needed and the impact 
of the reasonable accommodation on the operations of the agency.

 
Requesting Reasonable Accommodation 

I. 

The Request 

a.  The reasonable accommodation process begins as soon as the request for 

accommodation is made either orally or in writing.  (A sample request form is 
provided in Appendix A.)  The request does not have to use any special words, such 
as "reasonable accommodation," "disability," or "Rehabilitation Act."  An individual 
with a disability may request a reasonable accommodation whenever he/she chooses, 
even if he/she has not previously disclosed the existence of a disability.  The request 
does not necessarily mean that the employer is required to provide the change. 

b.  The individual's request must be considered if it is made to his/her supervisor; 
another supervisor or manager in his/her immediate chain of command; the Equal 
Employment Opportunity (EEO) office; any other office designated to oversee the 
reasonable accommodation process; in connection with the application process, any 
agency employee with whom the applicant has contact in connection with the 
application process; or any other individual designated by the organizational element. 

c.  A family member, friend, health professional, or other representative may 

request a reasonable accommodation on behalf of an employee or applicant with a 
disability.  The request shall be made to one of the same persons to whom the 
employee or applicant would make the request.  To the extent possible, an individual 
with a disability should be contacted to confirm that he/she in fact wants a reasonable 
accommodation.  The individual may refuse to accept an accommodation that is not 
needed. 

II.  Written Confirmations 

a.  To ensure accurate records regarding requests for accommodation, employees must 
follow up an oral request for accommodation with a written confirmation in a 
format determined appropriate by the organizational element.   While the written 
confirmation should be made as soon as possible following the request, it is not a 
requirement for the request itself.  However, processing of the request will begin as 
soon as it is made, whether or not the confirmation has been provided.  A sample 
written confirmation is provided as Appendix B.  Organizational element plans may 
also provide that confirmations can be made by fax or e-mail. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
b.  A written confirmation is not required when an individual needs a reasonable 

accommodation on a recurring basis (e.g., the assistance of sign language interpreters 
or readers). The written form is required only for the first request although 
appropriate notice must be given each time the accommodation is needed. 

III. 

The Interactive Process 

a.  Communication is a priority throughout the entire process.  Organizational element 
officials involved in the provision of reasonable accommodation should take a 
proactive approach in searching out and considering possible accommodations, 
including consulting appropriate resources for assistance. The employee requesting 
the accommodation should also participate, to the extent possible, in helping to 
identify an effective accommodation.  Resources, which are available to help both the 
Decision-maker and the individual requesting the accommodation to identify possible 
accommodations, are listed in Appendix B.  The Department and organizational 
element Disability Program Managers are also available to provide assistance. 

b.  On-going communication is particularly important where the specific limitation, 

problem, or barrier is unclear; where an effective accommodation is not obvious; or 
where the parties are considering different possible reasonable accommodations.  In 
those cases where the disability, the need for accommodation, and the type of 
accommodation that should be provided are clear, extensive discussions are not 
necessary. Even so, the Decision-maker and requesting individual should talk to each 
other to make sure that there is a full exchange of relevant information.  

IV.  Determining Who Will Handle the Request 

a.  Receiving Officials.  Organizational element officials must be designated to receive 
the request, determine who will be responsible for handling the request (the Decision-
maker), forward the request to the Decision-maker, and monitor the request through 
closure.  Typically this is the employee’s immediate supervisor; another supervisor or 
manager in his/her immediate chain of command; the Equal Employment Opportunity 
(EEO) office; any other office designated to oversee the reasonable accommodation 
process; in connection with the application process, any agency employee with whom 
the applicant has contact in connection with the application process; or any other 
individual designated by the organizational element. 

b.  Decision-makers.  Each organizational element shall designate those officials 

delegated principal responsibility for identifying possible accommodations and for 
determining whether an accommodation will be provided.  The Decision-maker may 
differ depending on whether the request is initiated by an employee or an applicant, 
or the type of accommodation being requested.  For example, the Decision-maker 
could be as follows: 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1)  the organizational element Human Resource Specialist responsible for the 

recruitment and/or selection process if the request for accommodation is from an 
applicant; 

(2)  the organizational element Disability Program Manager if the accommodation 
requested is for adaptive equipment, a reader or sign language interpreter, 
removal of an architectural barrier, accessible parking, or materials in alternative 
formats; 

(3)  the head of the office or his/her designee where the accommodation requested 

involves personnel actions; or 

(4)  if the requests are from an employee, the Decision-maker might be the 

employee's immediate supervisor or the head of the office. 

c.  Back-Up.  Organizational elements shall ensure that procedures are in place to provide 

back-up coverage to continue receiving, processing, and providing reasonable 
accommodations when the Receiving Official and Decision-makers are unavailable.  
The time frames discussed in paragraph VII, of this section will not be suspended or 
extended because of the unavailability of the Receiving or Decision-maker. 

d. Organizational Element Disability Program Manager.  The Disability Program 
Manager shall be available, as needed, to provide assistance to employees, human 
resources officials and Decision-makers in processing requests for reasonable 
accommodation.  

V. 

Reassignment as an Accommodation 

a.  Reassignment will only be considered as a reasonable accommodation if a 

determination is made that no other reasonable accommodations are available to 
enable the individual to perform his or her current job, or if the only effective 
accommodation would cause undue hardship. 

b.  In considering whether there are positions available for reassignment, the Decision-
maker should work with the organizational element's Disability Program Manager 
and Human Resources Office staff, as well as with the individual requesting the 
accommodation to identify: 

(1) all vacant positions within the organizational element for which the employee 

may be qualified, with or without reasonable accommodation; and 

(2) all positions which the organizational element's Human Resources Office have 
reason to believe will become vacant over the next 60 business days and for 
which the employee may be qualified. 

The organizational element will first focus on positions, which are equivalent to the 
employee's current job in terms of pay, status, and other relevant factors.  If there is 
no vacant equivalent position, the organizational element will consider vacant lower 
level positions for which the individual is qualified.  

 
 
 
 
c.  Reassignment may be made to a vacant position outside of the employee's commuting 
area if the employee is willing to relocate.  As with other transfers not required by 
management, the organizational element shall not pay for the employee's relocation 
costs unless organizational element policy provides for such payments for non-
disabled employees.  

d.  Reassignment as a form of reasonable accommodation can only be offered to DHS 

employees and is not available as an accommodation for job applicants.  

VI.  Requests For Medical Information 

a.  The Department, its organizational elements and offices are entitled to know that an 

employee or applicant has a covered disability that requires a reasonable 
accommodation.  In some cases the disability and need for accommodation will be 
obvious or otherwise already known to the Decision-maker.  In these cases, further 
medical information will not be sought.  However, when a disability and/or need for 
reasonable accommodation is not obvious or otherwise already known to the 
Decision-maker, the Department or organizational element may require that the 
individual provide reasonable documentation about the disability and his or her 
functional limitations. 

b.  If the Decision-maker believes that medical information is necessary in order to 

evaluate a request for reasonable accommodation, he/she will make a request to the 
organizational element EEO Officer or his/her designee to obtain such information.  

c.  The organizational element EEO Officer or his/her designee will make a 

determination as to whether medical documentation is necessary.  If it is, he/she will 
request the necessary medical information.  If it is not necessary, the request for 
accommodation will be returned promptly to the Decision-maker to complete the 
processing.  Where organizational element EEO officials make determination 
regarding the sufficiency of medical information or documentation, those EEO 
officials shall recuse themselves from processing complaints in which conflicts or 
perceived conflicts may exist. 

d.  If a determination is made to seek medical information, information will be requested 
sufficient to substantiate that the individual has a Rehabilitation Act disability and 
needs the reasonable accommodation requested.  Documentation unrelated to the 
disability claimed will not be requested.  Organizational element requests for 
medical information will follow the requirements set forth in EEOC's Enforcement 
Guidance: Disability-Related Inquiries and Medical Examinations of Employees 
Under the Americans with Disabilities Act (available on EEOC's internet site at 
www.eeoc.gov). 

 
 
 
 
e.  The organizational element EEO Officer or his/her designee will seek information or 
documentation about the disability and/or functional limitations from the individual, 
and/or ask the individual to obtain such information from an appropriate professional, 
such as a doctor, social worker, or rehabilitation counselor.  In order to get the most 
helpful possible information, all requests for information should describe the nature 
of the job, the essential functions the individual is expected to perform, and any other 
relevant information.  The organizational element EEO Officer or his/her designee 
should work with the Decision-maker, Human Resources Office staff, organizational 
element counsel, and any other individual designated by the organizational element, 
as appropriate, in seeking suitable information. 

f.  Once the medical documentation is received, the organizational element EEO Officer 

or his/her designee will evaluate the documentation, in consultation with the 
Decision-maker, Human Resources Office staff, organizational element counsel, a 
physician chosen by organizational element, and/or any other official designated by 
the organizational element, if necessary.  If the information provided by the health 
professional (or the information volunteered by the individual requesting the 
accommodation) is insufficient to enable the organizational element to determine 
whether an accommodation is appropriate, the organizational element may ask for 
further information.  First, however, the organizational element should explain to the 
individual seeking the accommodation, in specific terms, why the information 
provided is insufficient, what additional information is needed, and why it is 
necessary for a determination of the reasonable accommodation request.  The 
individual may then ask the health care or other appropriate professional to provide 
the missing information.  

g.  Alternatively, the organizational element EEO Officer or his/her designee and the 
individual requesting the accommodation may agree that the individual will sign a 
limited release, and that the organizational element may thereafter submit a list of 
specific questions to the individual's health care professional or may otherwise 
contact the individual's doctor.  

h.  If, after a reasonable period of time, there is still not sufficient information to 

demonstrate that the individual has a disability and needs a reasonable 
accommodation, the organizational element may request that the individual be 
examined by a physician chosen by the organizational element.  Such an examination 
would be performed at the organizational element’s expense. 

i.  The organizational element EEO Officer or his/her designee will let the Decision-

maker know whether the documentation demonstrates that a reasonable 
accommodation is appropriate and provide, if necessary, any additional relevant 
information about the individual's functional limitations.  

 
 
 
 
j. 

In some cases, the individual requesting the accommodation will supply medical 
information directly to the Decision-maker without being asked.  In these cases, the 
Decision-maker will consider such documentation and if additional information is 
needed, the Decision-maker will work with the Organizational element EEO Officer 
or his/her designee as set forth in this section.  

k.  If the organizational element determines that medical information submitted must be 
reviewed by a medical expert, the organizational element will choose the medical 
expert.  The cost of the review will be at the organizational element’s expense. 

l.  Failure by the individual to provide appropriate documentation or to cooperate 
in the organizational element's efforts to obtain such documentation can result 
in a denial of the reasonable accommodation. 

VII.  Time Frames for Processing Requests and Providing Reasonable Accommodations.  
The time necessary to process a request will depend on the nature of the accommodation 
requested and whether it is necessary to obtain supporting information.  At a minimum, 
however, requests shall be processed as follows: 

a. Requests Not Involving Extenuating Circumstances 

(1) If the request does not require that supporting medical information be 

obtained, the request shall be processed and the accommodation, if granted, 
provided as soon as possible but not more than 15 business days from the date 
the request was initially made, and sooner, if possible.  Since the Decision-maker 
may need the full 15 days to engage in the interactive process and collect all 
relevant information about possible accommodations, he/she should not delay 
beginning this process.  Failure to meet this time frame solely because a Decision-
maker delayed processing the request is not an extenuating circumstance. 

(2) If the request requires that supporting medical information be obtained to 

determine whether the requesting individual has a disability and/or to identify the 
functional limitations, the following will apply: 

(a)  The Decision-maker will make such request to the designated organizational 
element official as soon as possible after his or her receipt of the request for 
accommodation, but before the expiration of the 15-day period.  The 15-day 
period will be stayed.  The Department recognizes that the need for 
documentation may not become apparent until after the interactive process has 
begun. 

(b) If the designated organizational element official determines that medical 
information is not needed, the 15-day time period resumes as soon as the 
designated organizational element official notifies the Decision-maker that 
he/she can continue processing the request. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(c)  If the designated organizational element official determines that medical 

documentation is needed, the decision shall be made and the accommodation, 
if granted, shall be provided within 15 business days from the date the 
Decision-maker receives the relevant information from the designated 
organizational element official. 

(d) Examples of accommodations that can easily be provided within the 15-

day time frame include: 

1.  An employee with diabetes who sits in an open area asks for four breaks a 
day to test his/her blood sugar levels so that he/she may do these tests in 
private.  

2.  An employee, who takes anti-depressants that make it hard for him/her to 
get up in time to get to the office at 9:00 a.m., requests that he/she be 
allowed to start work at 10:00 a.m. and still put in an 8-hour day. 

3.  A supervisor distributes detailed agendas at the beginning of each staff 

meeting.  An employee with a learning disability asks that the agenda be 
distributed ahead of time because the disability makes it difficult to read 
and he/she needs more time to prepare. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
b. Request Involving Extenuating Circumstances 

(1)  When extenuating circumstances are present, the time for processing a request 
for reasonable accommodation and providing the accommodation will be 
extended as reasonably necessary.  It is the Department's policy that extensions 
based on extenuating circumstances should be limited to circumstances where 
they are strictly necessary.  All organizational element officials are expected to 
act as quickly as reasonably possible in processing requests and providing 
accommodations. The following are examples of extenuating circumstances: 

(a)  The purchase of equipment may take longer than 15 business days because of 
requirements under the Federal Acquisition Regulation and EEOC Order 
360.001, Acquisition Policies and Procedures. 

(b) Equipment must be back-ordered, the vendor typically used by the 

organizational element for goods or services has unexpectedly gone out of 
business, or the vendor cannot promptly supply the needed goods or services 
and another vendor is not immediately available. 

(c)  The employee with a disability needs to try working with equipment on a trial 
basis to ensure that it is effective before the organizational element buys the 
equipment. 

(d) New staff needs to be hired or contracted for, or an accommodation involves 

the removal of architectural barriers.  

(e)  There is an outstanding initial or follow-up request for medical information, or 

the designated organizational element official is evaluating medical 
information that has been provided. 

c.  Where extenuating circumstances are present, the Decision-maker must notify the 

individual, in writing, of the reason for the delay, and the approximate date on which 
a decision, or provision of the reasonable accommodation, is expected.  Any further 
developments or changes should also be communicated promptly to the individual. 

d.  If there is a delay in providing an accommodation that has been approved, the 

Decision-maker must decide whether temporary measures can be taken to assist the 
employee.  This could include providing the requested accommodation on a 
temporary basis or providing a less effective form of accommodation.  In addition, 
the Decision-maker may provide measures that are not reasonable accommodations 
within the meaning of the law (e.g., temporary removal of an essential function) if: 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1) they do not unreasonably interfere with the operations of the Department and 

organizational element; and  

(2) the employee is clearly informed that they are being provided only on a 

temporary, interim basis. 

For example, there may be a delay in receiving adaptive equipment for an employee 
with vision impairment.  During the delay, the supervisor might arrange for other 
employees to act as readers. This temporary measure may not be as effective as the 
adaptive equipment, but it will allow the employee to perform as much of the job as 
possible until the equipment arrives.  

e.  If a delay is attributable to the need to obtain or evaluate medical documentation and 
the organizational element has not yet determined that the individual is entitled to an 
accommodation, the organizational element may also provide an accommodation on a 
temporary basis. In such a case, the Decision-maker will notify the individual in 
writing that the accommodation is being provided on a temporary basis pending a 
decision on the accommodation request. 

f.  Organizational element Decision-makers who approve such temporary measures are 

responsible for assuring that they do not take the place of a permanent 
accommodation and that all necessary steps to secure the permanent accommodation 
are being taken. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VIII.  Expedited Processing.  In certain circumstances, a request for reasonable 

accommodation requires an expedited review and decision in a time frame that is shorter 
than the 15 business days discussed above.  This includes where a reasonable 
accommodation is needed: 

a.  To enable an applicant to apply for a job.  Depending on the timetable for 
receiving applications, conducting interviews, taking tests, and making hiring 
decisions, there may be a need to expedite a request for reasonable accommodation in 
order to ensure that an applicant with a disability has an equal opportunity to apply 
for a job.  Therefore, the organizational element needs to move as quickly as possible 
to make a decision and, if appropriate, provide a reasonable accommodation if 
needed. 

b.  To enable an employee to attend a meeting scheduled to occur shortly.  For 

example, an employee may need a sign language interpreter for a meeting scheduled 
to take place in 5 days.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
Granting Or Denying A Reasonable Accommodation Request 

I. 

Granting a Reasonable Accommodation Request.  As soon as the Decision-maker 
determines that a reasonable accommodation will be provided, that decision should be 
immediately communicated to the individual by the Decision-maker.  If the 
accommodation cannot be provided immediately, the Decision-maker must inform the 
individual of the projected time frame for providing the accommodation.  This notice 
does not need to be in writing. 

II. 

Denial of Reasonable Accommodation Request 

a.  As soon as the Decision-maker determines that a request for reasonable 

accommodation will be denied, he/she must issue a written decision to the individual 
who requested the accommodation, with a copy to the organizational element EEO 
Officer. The explanation for the denial should be written in plain language, clearly 
stating the specific reasons for the denial. 

(1)  Where the Decision-maker has denied a specific requested accommodation, but 

offered to make a different one in its place which was not agreed to during the 
interactive process, the denial notice should explain both the reasons for the 
denial of the requested accommodation and the reasons that the Decision-maker 
believes the chosen accommodation will be effective.  

(2)  Reasons for the denial of a request for reasonable accommodation must include 
specific reasons for the denial, for example, why the accommodation would 
not be effective or why it would result in undue hardship, and may include 
the following: 

(a)  The requested accommodation would not be effective.  

(b)  Providing the requested accommodation would result in undue hardship.  

Before reaching this determination, the Decision-maker must have explored 
whether other effective accommodations exist which would not impose 
undue hardship and therefore can be provided. 

 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A determination of undue hardship means that the organizational element 
finds that a specific accommodation would result in significant difficulty or 
expense, or would fundamentally alter the nature of the organizational 
element's operations.  When evaluating budgetary or administrative concerns 
to determine if undue hardship exists, the organizational element will follow 
the standards outlined in the regulations and in the "Enforcement Guidance 
on Reasonable Accommodation and Undue Hardship Under the Americans 
with Disabilities Act."  

(c)  Medical documentation is inadequate to establish that the individual has a 

disability and/or needs a reasonable accommodation.  

(d)  The requested accommodation would require the removal of an essential 

function.  

(e)  The requested accommodation would require the lowering of a performance 

or production standard.  

(3)  The written notice of denial must also inform the individual that he/she has the 
right to file an EEO complaint and may have rights to pursue Merit Systems 
Protection Board and union grievance procedures. The notice must also explain 
organizational element procedures available for dispute resolution. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dispute Resolution 

I. 

II. 

III. 

If an individual wishes reconsideration, he/she should first ask the Decision-maker to 
reconsider the decision. The individual may present additional information in support of 
his/her request. The Decision-maker will respond to the request for reconsideration 
within five business days.  

If the Decision-maker does not reverse the decision, the individual may appeal the 
decision.  The appeal shall be decided by the senior official having programmatic 
responsibility for the organizational element's Disability Program.  A response to the 
appeal will be issued to the individual within ten business days. 

Pursuing dispute resolution procedures, including seeking reconsideration from the 
Decision-maker and filing an appeal does not affect the time limits for initiating 
statutory and collective bargaining claims.  An individual's participation in any 
dispute resolution process does not satisfy the requirements for bringing a claim 
under EEO, MSPB, or union grievance procedures. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Confidentiality And Disclosure 

I. 

All medical information, including information about functional limitations and 
reasonable accommodation needs, obtained in connection with a request for reasonable 
accommodation must be kept confidential.  The information shall be kept in files 
separate from the individual's personnel file.  In addition, employees who obtain or 
receive such information are strictly bound by these confidentiality requirements.  The 
information may be disclosed only to the following individuals: 

a.  Supervisors and managers who need to know (including the Decision-maker who 
requested that the medical information be obtained) may be told about necessary 
restrictions on the work or duties of the employee and about the necessary 
accommodation(s), but medical information should only be disclosed if absolutely 
necessary. 

b.  First aid and safety personnel, when appropriate, if the disability might require 

emergency treatment. 

c.  Government officials when the information is necessary to investigate Department or 

organizational element compliance with the Rehabilitation Act. 

d.  In certain circumstances, to workers' compensation offices or insurance carriers.  

II.  Whenever medical information is disclosed, the individual disclosing the information 

must inform the recipients of the information about the confidentiality requirements that 
attach to it. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I. 

II. 

Information Tracking And Reporting 

The Decision-maker will complete the attached “Information Reporting” form and submit 
it to the organizational element EEO Office within 10 business days of the decision.  The 
decision maker should attach to the form copies of all information, including medical 
information; s/he received as part of processing the request.  The organizational element 
will maintain these records for the longer of the employee’s tenure with the 
organizational element or five years.  

The Organizational element EEO Officer will prepare and submit to the Office for Civil 
Rights and Civil Liberties annually, by October 15th,  a report containing the following 
information:  

a.  the number of reasonable accommodations, by type, that have been requested in the 

application process and whether those requests have been granted or denied; 

b.  the jobs (occupational series, grade level, and organizational element component) for 

which reasonable accommodations have been requested;  

c.  the types of reasonable accommodations that have been requested for each of those 

jobs; 

d.  the number of reasonable accommodations, by type, for each job that have been 
approved, and the number of accommodations, by type, that have been denied;  

e.  the number of requests for reasonable accommodations, by type, that relate to the 

benefits or privileges of employment, and whether those requests have been granted 
or denied; 

f. 

the reasons for denial of requests for reasonable accommodation;  

g.  the amount of time taken to process each request for reasonable accommodation; and  

h.  the sources of technical assistance that have been consulted in trying to identify 

possible reasonable accommodations. (Appendix C provides a listing of some of the 
sources of technical assistance available.) 

In addition, the report shall provide a qualitative assessment of the organizational 
element's reasonable accommodation program, including any recommendations for 
improvement of the Department's reasonable accommodation policies and procedures.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
III. 

Office for Civil Rights and Civil Liberties will prepare an annual report containing the 
information indicated above, presented in the aggregate.  The report format is provided in 
Appendix D.  Reports shall be maintained for at least three years.

 
 
 
 
Relation of Procedures to Statutory and Collective Bargaining Claims 

I. 

Executive Order 13164 does not create new rights for applicants or employees; 
nor does it limit an individual's rights under the Rehabilitation Act.  The policies 
and requirements described in these procedures are in addition to statutory and 
collective bargaining protections for persons with disabilities and the remedies 
they provide for the denial of requests for reasonable accommodation. 
Requirements governing the initiation of statutory and collective bargaining 
claims, including time frames for filing such claims, remain unchanged. 

II. 

An individual who chooses to pursue statutory or collective bargaining remedies 
for denial of reasonable accommodation must comply with the following: 

a.  EEO Complaint.  Contact an EEO counselor within 45 days from the date of 

receipt of the written notice of denial. 

b.  Collective Bargaining Claim.  File a grievance in accordance with the 
provisions of the controlling Collective Bargaining Agreement; or 

c.  MSPB Appeal.  Initiate an appeal within 30 days of an appealable adverse 

action as defined in 5 C.F.R. 1151.3. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Responsibilities 

I. 

The Office for Civil Rights and Civil Liberties shall: 

a.  Develop and issue policy and procedures governing the provision of 

reasonable accommodation; 

b.  Advise Department and organizational element officials regarding laws, 

regulations, executive orders and Department policy related to the provision 
of reasonable accommodation; 

c.  Ensure compliance with the governing laws, regulations, executive orders and 
Department policy related to the provision of reasonable accommodation; and  

d.  Develop systems to track and report on the provision of reasonable 

accommodation. 

II. 

Organizational Element Equal Opportunity Officers shall: 

a.  Develop and issue procedures for  processing requests for and providing 
reasonable accommodation, consistent with governing laws, regulations, 
executive orders, EEOC directives, and Department policy; 

b.  Ensure that supervisors and managers, and human resource and EEO  officials 

understand their obligation with respect to the provision of reasonable 
accommodation; 

c.  Ensure the confidentiality of medical information, including information 

about functional limitations and reasonable accommodation needs, obtained in 
connection with a request for reasonable accommodation; and 

d.  Develop systems to track and report on the provision of reasonable 

accommodation. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendices

 
 
APPENDIX A:  SAMPLE REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION REQUEST FORM

Request For Reasonable Accommodation 

Applicant/Employee Name 

Office Location and Address 

Occupational Series and Grade 

  Office Telephone Number 

(e.g., GS-301-11) 

Briefly describe the medical condition requiring accommodation. 

Briefly describe the specific accommodation being requested.  (If additional space is 
needed, attach a separate sheet.) 

Explain how the requested accommodation would assist you in: (1) performing the 
essential duties of your position, (2) using the job application process, or (3) taking 
advantage of a benefit or privilege offered by the office/bureau. 

Requester: 

Date:      

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
Appendix B:  Sample Confirmation Form 

CONFIRMATION OF REQUEST FOR REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION 

Employee/Applicant Data 

Name: 

Telephone: 

Organization: 

 Date of Request  

_______________    ______________  __ 

 Date of Receipt 

ACCOMMODATION REQUESTED (Be as specific as possible, e.g., adaptive equipment, 
reader, interpreter.) 

REASON FOR REQUEST 

Return Form to: (Enter Title/Address of Responsible Official) 

SUBMITTED BY: 

TELEPHONE: 

B-1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
   
   
   
    
   
   
   
   
   
   
 
 
Appendix C:  Reasonable Accommodation Resources 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
1-800-669-3362 (Voice) 1-800-800-3302 (TTY) 

The EEOC Publication Center has many free documents on the Title I employment 
provisions of the ADA, including both the statute, 42 U.S.C. 12101 et seq. (1994), and 
the regulations, 29 C.F.R. 1630 (1997). In addition, the EEOC has published a great deal 
of basic information about reasonable accommodation and undue hardship. The two main 
sources of interpretive information are:  

(1) the Interpretive Guidance accompanying the Title I regulations (also known as 
the "Appendix" to the regulations), 29 C.F.R. pt. 1630 app. 1630.2(o), (p), 
1630.9 (1997), and 

(2) A Technical Assistance Manual on the Employment Provisions (Title I) of the 
Americans with Disabilities Act III, 8 FEP Manual (BNA) 405:6981, 6998-
7018 (1992). The Manual includes a 200-page Resource Directory, including 
federal and state agencies, and disability organizations that can provide 
assistance in identifying and locating reasonable accommodations. 

EEOC also has discussed issues involving reasonable accommodation in the following 
guidance and documents: 

(1) Enforcement Guidance: Pre-employment Disability-Related Questions and 

Medical Examinations at 5, 6-8, 20, 21-22, 8 FEP Manual (BNA) 405:7191, 
7192-94, 7201 (1995); 

(2) Enforcement Guidance: Workers' Compensation and the ADA at 15-20, 8 

FEP Manual (BNA) 405:7391, 7398-7401 (1996); 

(3) Enforcement Guidance: The Americans with Disabilities Act and Psychiatric 
Disabilities at 19-28, 8 FEP Manual (BNA) 405:7461, 7470-76 (1997); 

(4) Fact Sheet on the Family and Medical Leave Act, the Americans with 

Disabilities Act, and Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 at 6-9, 8 FEP 
Manual (BNA) 405:7371, 7374-76 (1996); and 

(5) Enforcement Guidance: Disability-Related Inquiries and Medical 

Examinations of Employees Under the Americans with Disabilities Act at 20, 
22, 23, 24-5, 8 FEP Manual (BNA) 405:7701, 7711, 7712-14, 7715-16 (2000). 

C-1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
All of the above-listed documents, with the exception of the ADA Technical Assistance 
Manual and Resource Directory, are also available through the Internet at 
http://www.eeoc.gov. 

Job Accommodation Network (JAN) 
1-800-232-9675 (Voice/TTY) 
http://janweb.icdi.wvu.edu/. 

A service of the President's Committee on Employment of People with Disabilities. JAN 
can provide information, free-of-charge, about many types of reasonable 
accommodations. 

GSA’s Center for IT Accommodation (CITA) is the Government’s principal advocate 
and coordinator for making information technology accessible for people with 
disabilities. GSA - Center for IT Accommodation (CITA) 

ADA Disability and Business Technical Assistance Centers (DBTACs) 
1-800-949-4232 (Voice/TTY) 

The DBTACs consist of 10 federally funded regional centers that provide information, 
training, and technical assistance on the ADA.  Each center works with local business, 
disability, governmental, rehabilitation, and other professional networks to provide 
current ADA information and assistance, and places special emphasis on meeting the 
needs of small businesses. The DBTACs can make referrals to local sources of expertise 
in reasonable accommodations. 

The Access Board provides its own emergency evacuation plan and a summary 
document on the procedures.  Also included is a resources link to other related sites . 
http://www.access-board.gov/news/evacplanning.htm 

Registry of Interpreters for the Deaf 
(301) 608-0050 (Voice/TTY) 

The Registry offers information on locating and using interpreters and transliteration 
services. 

C-2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RESNA Technical Assistance Project 
(703) 524-6686 (Voice) (703) 524-6639 (TTY) 
http://www.resna.org/ 

RESNA, the Rehabilitation Engineering and Assistive Technology Society of North 
America, can refer individuals to projects in all 50 states and the six territories offering 
technical assistance on technology-related services for individuals with disabilities. 
Services may include: 

(1) information and referral centers to help determine what devices may assist a 
person with a disability (including access to large data bases containing 
information on thousands of commercially available assistive technology 
products); 

(2) centers where individuals can try out devices and equipment; 

(3) assistance in obtaining funding for and repairing devices; and 

(4) equipment exchange and recycling programs.  

DoD's Computer /Electronic Accommodations Program (CAP)  
http://www.tricare.osd.mil/cap/  provides assessment, electronic assistive devices training 
and other support services to employees with disabilities quickly, effectively, and at no 
cost to partnering agencies.  CAP assistive technology explores solutions for employees 
with vision, hearing, dexterity and cognitive/communicative disabilities 

For additional information, or to schedule a tour of the Technology Center at the 
Pentagon, contact CAP at: 

(703) 681-8813 (VOICE)  
(703) 681-0882 (TTY)   
(703) 681-9075  (FAX), or  

• 
• 
• 
•  email CAP@tma.osd.mil. 

website: http://www.tricare.osd.mil/cap/ 

C-3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX D:  Annual Report on Requests for Reasonable Accommodation 

Part 1:  Reasonable accommodations requested in the application process 

A. Series 
and        
Grade  

B. Type Accommodation  

C. Total 
Granted 

D. Total 
Denied 

E. Reason for Denial 

F. Total 
Requests 

 G. Processing 
Time 

D-1 

 
 
 
                                                 
                                                               
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
Part 2:  Reasonable accommodations requested that relate to the benefits and privileges of employment 

A. Type Accommodation  

B. Total 
Granted 

C. Total 
Denied 

 D. Total

 Processing 
Time 

D-2 

 
 
 
                                                                                
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
Part 3:  Resources of technical assistance consulted in identifying possible 

accommodations 

List all resources (including organizational element resources) consulted in an effort to 
identify reasonable accommodations for employees and applicants. 

Part 4:  Assessment of organizational element's reasonable accommodation 

program 

Provide a brief qualitative assessment on the organizational element’s reasonable 
accommodation program, including any improvements and/or policy and procedural 
changes needed. 

D-3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Instructions for Completing Part 1:  Reasonable accommodations requested in 
the application process 

Part 1A - Occupational Series and Grade Level.  Each occupational series and grade 
(e.g., GS-301-11) must be identified.  If there are two or more positions with the same 
occupational series and grade level, but different types of accommodations were 
requested, each occupational series and grade must be identified separately. 

Part 1B - Type of Accommodation.  Identify the type of accommodation requested for 
each occupational series and grade level identified in Part IA.  The accommodation must 
relate to job performance.  Examples are as follows: 

Job Restructuring 
Leave 
Modified or Part-Time Work Schedule 
Modified Workplace Policies 
Reassignment 

Part 1C - Total Requests Approved.  For each separate occupational series, grade level 
and type listed in Parts 1A and 1B, enter the total number of requests approved. 

Part 1D - Total Requests Denied.  For each separate occupational series, grade level 
and type listed in Parts 1A and 1B, enter the total number of requests denied. 

Part 1E - Total Requests.  This field should equal the sum of Parts 1C and 1D. 

Part 1G - Processing Time.  Enter the amount of time required to process each requests 
identified in Parts 1A and 1B.  If more than one request is entered in a field, enter the 
average processing time. 

Instructions for Completing Part 2:  Reasonable accommodations requested 
that relate to the benefits or privileges of employment.  Benefits and 
privileges of employment include, but are not limited to, employer-
sponsored: (1) training, (2) services (e.g., employee assistance programs, 
credit unions, cafeterias, lounges, gymnasiums, auditoriums, transportation), 
and (3) parties or other social functions (e.g., parties to celebrate retirements 
and birthdays, and office outings). 

D-4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Part 2A - Type of Accommodation. Identify each different type of accommodation 
requested.  The accommodation must relate to a benefit or privilege of employment. 

Examples are as follows: 

Sign language interpreters 
Written materials in alternative formats (e.g., Braille, large print or audio-cassette) 
Adaptive equipment 
Modified leave procedures 

Part 2B - Total Requests Approved.  For each type of accommodation listed in Part 2A, 
enter the total number of requests approved. 

Part 2C - Total Requests Denied.  For each type of accommodation listed in Part 2A, 
enter the total number of requests denied. 

Part 2D - Total Requests.  This field should equal the sum of Part 2B and 2C. 

Part 3:  Resources of technical assistance consulted in identifying possible 

accommodations.  Self-explanatory 

Part 4:  Assessment of bureau's reasonable accommodation program.   
Self-explanatory 

D-5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
