DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY 
TELEWORK APPLICATION AND AGREEMENT

1. Check one of the following: 

New Agreement

Change in Existing Agreement

2. Employee Name

3. Organization

4. Position Title

5. Series and Grade

6. Office Telephone No.

7. Supervisor (Name/Title)

8. Type of Telework:

Regular (Core)

Situational (Episodic)

 Part I - Completion of this agreement indicates that: 

1. The employee's telework arrangement begins on

(date)

2. The employee's official tour of duty and location are listed below. 

Telework Days 
(Week 1)

Start and End 
Times

Telework Days 
(Week 2)

Start and End 
Times

DAY

Monday

Tuesday

Wednesday

Thursday

Friday

3. Employee volunteers to participate in the program and to adhere to the applicable guidelines and policies. Agency concurs with employee 
participation and agrees to the applicable guidelines and policies.

4. Employee understands that FEMA may require participating employee to work from their telework site, e.g., home, satellite office, or other 
location, during periods of Unscheduled Telework authorization due to area closures, dismissals, unforeseen emergencies or other reasons as 
authorized by the Supervisor.  

5. Management reserves the right to alter the employee's established telework schedule to accommodate peak workload office demands or for any 
other official purpose with advance notifications.

6. Employee's official tour of duty must include at least a 30-minute uncompensated lunch.

7. Employee's official duty station is:

(City and State) for purposes such as pay, travel,

etc. The location at which the employee is designated to work (i.
e., alternate work location) while not at the official duty station is:

The phone number of the alternate worksite is

8. Employee understands requirements for an adequate and safe office space and that these requirements must be met.

9. An employee approved for telework is required to satisfactorily complete all assigned work, consistent with the approach adopted for all other 
employees in the work group.

10. The employee will regularly meet/speak with the supervisor to receive assignments and to review completed work as necessary or appropriate. 
The employee's job performance will be evaluated on criteria and milestones determined by the supervisor with input form employee.

11. Employee's Time and Attendance (WebTA) for all official duty time spent in a Telworking status will be recorded using the proper Telework 
code. The supervisor and employee are responsible for ensuring the accuracy of time and attendance reported for the employee's work at the 
official duty station and the alternative workplace. The supervisor agrees to certify biweekly the employee's Time and Attendance Daily Report for 
hours worked. The employee's timekeeper will retain a copy of the employee's work schedule. 

12. Employee agrees to participate in surveys and data calls relative to the FEMA Telework Program, as requested. 

13. The employee must obtain supervisory approval before taking leave in accordance with established office procedures in accordance with 
FEMAs Absence and Leave policies.. Use of sick leave, annual leave, or other leave credits during regularly schedule telework time must be 
approved in advance by the supervisor. Overtime must be approved in advance by the supervisor.

14. Employee will utilize Government equipment for official business only and in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, policies, etc., as well 
as safeguard said equipment Employee is responsible for servicing and maintaining employee-owned equipment.

15. The employee agrees to permit access to their home by agency representatives when necessary to ensure proper maintenance of agency-
owned equipment.  Teleworkers should be given at least one day's advance notice of any such visit. Visits should only be done during regular 
working hours.

FEMA Form 123-9-0-1, (1/13)

16. Employee is covered under the Federal Employees Compensation Act in the course of performing official duties at the alternate work location 
or official duty station. Any accident or injury which occurs at the alternate work location must be brought immediately to the attention of the 
supervisor.

17. Employee's most recent performance rating must be at least equivalent to "proficient" or "achieved expectations".

18. Employee understands that telework is not a substitute for dependent care (child care or elder care) and that appropriate arrangements must 
be made to accommodate children and adults who cannot care for themselves, while performing official duties in a telework site.

19. The employee understands that the Government will not be responsible for any operating costs that are associated with the use of employee's 
home as an alternative workplace, for example home maintenance, insurance or utilities.

20. Employee will apply approved safeguards to protect Government records from unauthorized disclosure or damage and will comply with the 
provisions set forth in the Privacy Act of 1974, Public Act of 1974, Public Law 93-579, codified at Title 5, U.S.C., Section 55a.

21. The employee agrees to abide by the Department of Homeland Security and FEMA Standards of Ethical Conduct Standards while working on 
official duty.

22. Telework agreements will be reviewed and discussed between the employee and supervisor on an annual basis. 

23. Management may terminate participation in this arrangement at any time.

24. The employee may withdraw from the program at any time. The supervisor and employee understand that either party may terminate the 
Telework agreement with reasonable advance notice, generally fourteen calendar days, but not less than seven calendar days and require the 
employee to resume working at his/her official duty station. Reasons for termination will be documented by the supervisor and/or employee and 
filed with this agreement. 

The employee's failure to comply with the terms of this agreement may result in the termination of this agreement and the telework arrangement. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this agreement may also result in appropriate disciplinary or adverse action against the employee.

Compliance with this Agreement 

By signing this agreement, the employee certifies that (s)he has read the terms of this agreement and agrees to follow the policies and procedures 
outlined in them as well as all other applicable regulations, policies, and procedures. 

Part - II 

Certification 

Employee's Signature

Supervisor's Signature

Title

Title

Date

Date

Telework Coordinator's Signature

Date Reviewed

Part III - Approval/Disapproval

Your request to participate in the telework program is: 

Approved as written

Approved with the following modification(s)

Disapproved for the following reason(s):

The employee does not have sufficient duties or work activities suitable for performance at an alternate work site.

The employee's absence from the work place under a telework arrangement will unacceptably impact the operation of the work unit.

The extent of supervision required for the employee could not be achieved in conjunction with a telework arrangement.

The employee's alternative work site does not meet prescribed acceptability standards. (State the specific deficiency issue(s), such as: 
safety, two-way communications, access to required materials, IT security, or non-work related distractions and/or obligations.)
The employee does not meet performance eligibility requirements. (State the specific deficiency issue(s) such as: writing, problem-
solving, reliability for the following prescribed policies and procedures, organization/time management skills, or work quality/quantity.
The employee does not meet conduct-related eligibility requirements. (State the specific deficiency issues(s), such as: leave abuse, 
excessive absence, or a record of misconduct which precludes participation at this time. If no additional misconduct in one (1) year, 
employee may reapply.

Other (please specify):

Supervisor's Signature

Title

Telework Program Coordinators Signature

Date

Date

  
  
FEDERAL EMERGENCY 
MANAGEMENT AGENCY 

MANUAL   

December 3, 2002 

1430.1 Chg. 1  

ER 

Date 

Number 

Reasonable Accommodation   
for the  
Federal Emergency Management Agency 

Foreword 

1.  Purpose.  This transmits changes to FEMA Manual 1430.1, “Reasonable Accommodation for 
the Federal Emergency Management Agency” (FEMA), dated August 22, 2001.  Requests for 
reasonable accommodations will be processed by FEMA, and where appropriate, provided in a 
prompt, fair and efficient manner. 

2.  Action Required.  Holders of FEMA Manual 1430.1, shall file this transmittal sheet in front 
of the Manual for reference purposes. 

3.  Change Lines.  A vertical line in the right or left margins immediately opposite the new or 
revised material indicates new or revised material appearing on the change page.   

Insert   

New Table of Contents 

Pages 1-1, 1-2, and 1-3 

Pages 2-1 

Page 3-1 

Page 4-3 

Page 5-1, 5-2 and 5-3   

Pages 8-1 and 8-2 

Remove 

Old Table of Contents 

Page 1-1 and 1-2 

Page 2-1 and 2-2 

Page 3-1 

Page 4-3 

Page 5-1 and 5-2 

Pages 8-1 and 8-2 

/s/ 

___________________________ 
Joe M. Allbaugh 
Director 

Distribution:  J(AllPersHQFld) ) http://www.fema.gov/library/femainfo.shtm 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
            
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
December 3, 2002 

FEMA Manual 1430.1 Chg.1 

Contents 

Chapter 1 - General Information 

Page 

Paragraph   

Purpose 
Applicability and Scope 
Policy   
Procedures 
Authority 
References 
Responsibilities 
Definition of Key Terms 
Forms Prescribed 

Chapter 2 - Request For Reasonable Accommodations 

Reasonable Accommodations  
Written Requests 

Chapter 3 - Examples of Accommodations 

Computer and Electronic Assistive Devices   
Reader or Sign Language Interpreter  
Accessible Parking/Materials  
Telework 

Chapter 4 - Interactive Process 

Interactive Process 
Requests for Medical Information 
Confidentiality Requirements  

Chapter 5 - Time Frames 

Processing Requests 
Extenuating Circumstances 

1-1 
1-1 
1-1 
1-1 
1-1 
1-1 
1-2 
1-2 
1-3 

2-1 
2-1 

3-1 
3-1 
3-1 
3-1 

4-1 
4-2 
4-3 

5-1 
5-1 

Chapter 6 - Granting A Reasonable Accommodation Request 

Granting a Request 
Denial of a Request 
Dispute Resolution 

6-1 
6-1 
6-2 

1-1    
1-2 
1-3 
1-4 
1-5 
1-6    
1-7 
1-8 
1-9 

2-1 
2-2 

3-1    
3-2 
3-3 
3-4 

4-1    
4-2 
4-3 

5-1    
5-2 

6-1    
6-2 
6-3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FEMA Manual 1430.1 Chg.1 

December 3, 2002 

i 

Page 

Paragraph   

Chapter 7 - Claims 

Statutory and Collective Bargaining Claims   

7-1 

7-1 

Chapter 8 – Assistance Information  

Tracking and Reporting  
Inquiries 
Distribution 
Resource Assistance 

8-1 
8-1 
8-1 
8-2 

8-1    
8-2 
8-3 
8-4 

Appendix A - FEMA Form 14-13, "Request for Reasonable Accommodation" 

Appendix B - FEMA Form 14-13A, “Reasonable Accommodation Information Reporting 
Form"   

Appendix C - Department of Defense (DOD) – CAP (Computer Accommodation Program) 
Accommodation Request Form 

 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
December 3, 2002 

FEMA Manual 1430.1 Chg.1 

ii 
Chapter 1 

General Information 

1-1.  Purpose. This manual establishes the policy and procedures for the Federal Emergency 
Management Agency (FEMA) on reasonable accommodation.   

1-2.  Applicability and Scope. The provisions of this manual are applicable to permanent full-
time and part-time employees, Cadre On-Call Response (CORE) employees, Disaster Assistance 
Employees (DAEs), disaster local hires and applicants for any of these positions at FEMA. 

1-3.  Policy.  FEMA's policy is to fully comply with the reasonable accommodation 
requirements of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973.  Under the law, Federal agencies must provide 
reasonable accommodations to qualified individuals with disabilities, except in cases where this 
would cause undue hardship.  (See Section 1-8 for definitions of “Qualified Individual With a 
Disability” and “Undue Hardship.”)   

1-4.  Procedures.  Requests for reasonable accommodation can be made as follows: 

a.  An employee may request a reasonable accommodation orally or in writing from his/her 

immediate supervisor or the Disability Program Manager.  Any request must be documented on 
Form 14-13, “Request for Reasonable Accommodation” (Appendix A). 

b.  An applicant for employment may request a reasonable accommodation 

orally or in writing from any FEMA employee with whom s/he has contact in connection 
with the application process.  Such employee must forward the request to the appropriate 
decision maker (as delineated in Section 1-7) as soon as possible.  An applicant for employment 
may also request reasonable accommodation from the Disability Program Manager in the Office 
of Equal Rights.  An oral request must be documented on Form 14-13, “Request for Reasonable 
Accommodation” (Appendix A).   

c.  A family member, health professional, or other representative may request an 

accommodation on behalf of a FEMA employee or applicant.  The request should go to one of 
the same persons to whom the employee or applicant would make the request. 

1-5.  Authority. Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973.  Under this law, Federal agencies 
must provide reasonable accommodation to qualified employees or applicants with disabilities, 
except in cases where this would cause undue hardship to the Agency.   

1-6.  References.  Title 29, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 1614. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FEMA Manual 1430.1 Chg.1 

December 3, 2002 

1-1 

1-7.  Responsibilities.   The FEMA staff member who first receives the request from an 
employee must forward it to the individual’s first line supervisor who will be the decision maker.  
The FEMA staff member who first receives the request from an applicant for employment at 
FEMA Headquarters, one of the regions, or for a CORE or DAE position must forward it to the 
Deputy Director, Human Resources Division who will be the decision maker.  The FEMA staff 
member who first receives the request from an applicant for employment as a local hire in a 
disaster must forward it to the FCO or his/her designee who will be the decision maker in 
conjunction with the Equal Rights Officer servicing that disaster.   

1-8.  Definition of Key Terms.   

a. Reasonable Accommodation:  Any change in the work environment or in the 
way things are customarily done that would enable a qualified individual with a disability to 
have employment opportunities equal to those of an individual without a disability.  Reasonable 
accommodations may include: 

(1) Making existing facilities accessible; 
(2)  Part-time or modified work schedules; 
(3)  Acquiring or modifying equipment; and 
(4)  Providing qualified readers or interpreters. 

b.  Disability:  A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits a major life 
activity (i.e., caring for one’s self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, 
breathing, learning and working). 

c.  Qualified Individual with a Disability:  An individual with a disability is qualified if:  
(1) he/she satisfies the requisite skill, experience, education, and other job-related requirements 
of the position; and, (2) he/she can perform the essential functions of the position, with or 
without reasonable accommodation. 

d.  Essential Functions:  Those job duties that are so fundamental to the position that the 
individual holds or desires that he/she cannot do the job without performing them.  A function 
can be “essential” if, among other things, the position exists specifically to perform that function; 
there are a limited number of other employees who could perform the function; or, the function 
is specialized and the individual is hired based on his/her ability to perform it.  Determination of 
the essential functions of a position must be done on a case-by-case basis so that it reflects the 
job as actually performed, and not simply the components of a generic position description. 

e.  Undue Hardship:  FEMA must provide reasonable accommodation for a disability 
unless it would cause significant difficulty or expense.  Determination of undue hardship is 
always made on a case-by-case basis, considering factors that include the nature and cost of the 
reasonable accommodation needed and the impact of the reasonable accommodation on the 
operations of the agency. 

 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
December 3, 2002 

FEMA Manual 1430.1 Chg.1 

1-9.  Forms Prescribed.  This manual prescribes the use of the following forms:  

1-2 

FEMA Form 14-13, "Request for Reasonable Accommodation" (Note:  the reverse of this form 
is “Management Response to Request for Reasonable Accommodation”); FEMA Form 14-13A, 
"Reasonable Accommodation Information Reporting Form.”  These FEMA forms, may be 
obtained through the Agency's Printing, Publications and Graphics Arts Branch, Program 
Services and Systems Branch, Administration and Resource Planning Directorate or by accessing 
the FEMA electronic forms website at http://DocNet.fema.gov.  This manual also prescribes the 
use of the Department of Defense (CAP) form, which may be obtained from the Office of Equal 
Rights.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FEMA Manual 1430.1 Chg.1 

December 3, 2002 

1-3 
Chapter 2 

Requests For Reasonable Accommodation 

2-1.  Reasonable Accommodations.   

a.  A request for reasonable accommodation is a statement that an individual needs an 
adjustment or change at work, in the application for employment, or in a benefit or privilege of 
employment, for a reason related to a medical condition.  The reasonable accommodation 
process begins as soon as the request for accommodation is made. 

b.  An individual with a disability may request a reasonable accommodation whenever 

he/she chooses, even if he/she has not previously disclosed the existence of a disability.  
However, the individual must make the manager aware that he/she has a disability at the time of 
the request.  Special words, such as “reasonable accommodation,” “disability,” or 
“Rehabilitation Act” do not necessarily have to be used in making the request. 

c.  For specific procedures, (See 1-4).   

2-2.  Written Requests.   

a.  To enable FEMA to keep accurate records regarding requests for accommodation, 
employees and applicants for employment seeking a reasonable accommodation should follow 
up an oral request by completing the attached “Request For Reasonable Accommodation” form 
(Appendix A) and providing it to the decision maker. 

b.  The “Request for Reasonable Accommodations” form should be filled out as soon as 
possible following an oral request, but it is not a requirement for processing the request itself.  
FEMA will begin processing the request as soon as it is made, whether or not the form has been 
filled out.  If an employee does not fill out the form, the decision maker on the request should do 
so.   

c.   The “Request for Reasonable Accommodations” form is not required to be filled out 
when an individual needs a reasonable accommodation on a repeated basis (e.g., the assistance of 
sign language interpreters or readers).  The written form is required only for the first request 
although appropriate notice by the employee must be given each time the accommodation is 
needed. 

 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
December 3, 2002 

FEMA Manual 1430.1 Chg.1 

2-1 
Chapter 3 

Examples of Accommodations: 

3-1.  Computer and Electronic Assistive Devices.  FEMA has an interagency agreement with 
the Department of Defense (DOD), to provide computer and electronic assistive devices to 
accommodate employees with disabilities.  Examples of such accommodations include voice 
recognition/keyboards, telecommunication devices, training on assistive technology, screen 
readers/magnification, assistive listening devices, and captioning services.  To request such an 
accommodation the employee must complete DOD’s Computer Accommodations Program 
(CAP) form and have it approved by his/her supervisor and coordinated with the Disability 
Program Manager in the Office of Equal Rights. 

3-2.  Reader or Sign Language Interpreter.  When an employee has a recurring, predictable 
need for accommodation, such as a reader or sign language interpreter, FEMA may be obligated 
to provide it, whether or not the employee has requested it.  When an employee does make such 
a request, it can be handled by the employee’s immediate supervisor.  Readers and sign language 
interpreters may not always be immediately available.  Therefore, supervisors should plan 
activities requiring such services in advance to ensure their availability.  The Deputy Director, 
Human Resources Division will handle requests from applicants for employment at 
Headquarters, the regions, and for applicants for employment as CORE and DAE employees.  
The FCO or his/her designee(s) in conjunction with the Equal Rights Officer at disaster sites will 
handle requests from applicants for employment for positions as local hires.  The Disability 
Program Manager in the Office of Equal Rights is available to provide technical assistance and 
information regarding resources for sign language interpreters. 

3-3.  Accessible Parking and Materials In Alternative Formats.  Requests from employees 
for accessible parking and materials in alternative formats can be handled by the employee’s 
immediate supervisor or the Disability Program Manager.  The Deputy Director, Human 
Resources Division will handle requests from applicants for employment at Headquarters, the 
regions, and for applicants for employment as CORE and DAE employees.  The FCO or his/her 
designee(s) in conjunction with the Equal Rights Officers at disaster sites will handle requests 
from applicants for employment for positions as local hires. 

3-4.  Telework.  Telework is available only to permanent full-time, permanent part-time and 
CORE employees.  Requests for telework as a reasonable accommodation for a disability must 
be made in accordance with the procedures outlined in the FEMA Manual “Program Guidance 
for Flexible Workplace Environment” (FEMA Manual 3000.3/July 2000).  Such requests must 
include sufficient medical documentation to substantiate the need for telework.  When 
submitting the “Telework Application Form” to the supervisor, the box for “medical” must be 
checked under “Application Type.” 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FEMA Manual 1430.1 Chg.1 

December 3, 2002 

3-1 
Chapter 4 

Interactive Process 

4-1.  Interactive Process.  The parties need to discuss the issue to determine what, if any, 
accommodation should be provided.  This means that the individual requesting the 
accommodation and the FEMA decision maker must talk to each other about the request, the 
process for determining whether an accommodation will be provided, and potential 
accommodations.   

Communication is a priority throughout the entire process.  The FEMA decision maker will have 
the principal responsibility for identifying possible accommodations.  He/she will take a 
proactive approach in searching out and considering possible accommodations, including 
consulting appropriate resources for assistance.  The employee requesting the accommodation 
should also participate to the extent possible in helping to identify an effective accommodation.  
The Disability Program Manager is also available to provide assistance. 

a.  The FEMA decision maker will:  (1) explain to the applicant or employee that he/she 
will be making the decision on the request; and, (2) describe what will happen in the processing 
of the request.  This initial discussion should happen as soon as possible. 

b.  On-going communication is particularly important where the specific limitation, 
problem, or barrier is unclear; where an effective accommodation is not obvious; or where the 
parties are considering different possible reasonable accommodations.  In those cases where the 
disability, the need for accommodation, and the type of accommodation that should be provided, 
are clear, extensive discussions are not necessary.  Even so, the decision maker and requesting 
individual should talk to each other to make sure that there is a full exchange of relevant 
information. 

c.  The decision maker or any other FEMA official who receives information in  

connection with a request for reasonable accommodation must keep the information confidential.  
He/she may share information connected with that request with other agency officials only when 
the agency official(s) need to know the information in order to make a determination on a 
reasonable accommodation request.   

d.  There are specific considerations in the interactive process when responding to 

a request for reassignment. 

(1)  Reassignment is a form of reasonable accommodation that must be provided to an 

employee, who, because of a disability, can no longer perform the essential functions of the 
position he/she holds, with or without reasonable accommodation.  Reassignment is a “last 
resort” accommodation that must be considered if there are no effective accommodations that 
would enable the employee to perform the essential functions of his/her current job, or if all 
other possible accommodations would impose undue hardship on the Agency. 

 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
December 3, 2002 

FEMA Manual 1430.1 Chg.1 

4-1 
(2)  Reassignment is available only to employees, not to applicants.  In addition, 

reassignment may be made only to a vacant position.  The law does not require that agencies  
create new positions or move employees from their jobs in order to create a vacancy. 

(3)  In considering whether there are positions available for reassignment, the 
Disability Program Manager will work with the Human Resources Division, the offices 
identifying the vacancies, and the individual requesting the accommodation to identify: (1) 
vacant positions within the agency for which the employee may be qualified, with or without 
reasonable accommodation; and, (2) positions which the Human Resources Division has reason 
to believe will become vacant over the next 60 business days and for which the employee may be 
qualified.  The agency will first focus on positions that are equivalent to the employee’s current 
job in terms of pay, status and other relevant factors.  If there is no vacant equivalent position, 
FEMA will consider vacant lower level positions for which the individual is qualified. 

(4)  Reassignment may be made to a vacant position outside of the employee’s 

commuting area if the employee is willing to relocate.  As with other transfers not required by 
management, FEMA will not pay for the employee’s relocation costs. 

4-2.  Requests for Medical Information.  FEMA is entitled to know that an employee or 
applicant has a covered disability that requires a reasonable accommodation.  In some cases the 
disability and need for accommodation will be obvious or otherwise already known to the 
decision maker.  In these cases, FEMA will not seek any further medical information.  However, 
when a disability and/or need for reasonable accommodation is not obvious or otherwise already 
known to the decision maker, FEMA may require that the individual provide documentation 
about the disability and his or her functional limitations.  A request for medical documentation 
may be made to the individual and/or the individual may be asked to obtain information from an 
appropriate professional, such as a doctor, social worker, or rehabilitation counselor.  The 
information may include: 

a.  The nature, severity, and duration of the individual’s impairment; 

b.  The activity or activities that the impairment limits; 

c.  The extent to which the impairment limits the individual’s ability to perform 

the activity or activities; and/or, 

d.  Why the individual requires the particular reasonable accommodation requested, as well 

as how the accommodation will assist the individual in applying for a job, performing the 
essential functions of the job, or, enjoying a benefit of the workplace. 

(1)  If a decision maker believes that medical information is necessary in order to 

evaluate a request for reasonable accommodation, he/she should coordinate such request with the 
Disability Program Manager in the Office of Equal Rights prior to requesting such information.   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FEMA Manual 1430.1 Chg.1 

December 3, 2002 

(2)  When medical documentation is submitted to the decision maker, he/she must 
provide all such documentation to the Disability Program Manager at the conclusion of the 
process for record keeping purposes.   

4-2 

  e.  In order to get the most helpful information possible, all requests for medical 
documentation should describe the nature of the job, the essential functions the individual is 
expected to perform, and any other relevant information.   

f.  The individual requesting the accommodation will be asked to sign a limited release of 

medical information specific to the accommodation requested. 

   g.  If the information provided by the health professional, or by the individual requesting 

the accommodation, is insufficient to determine whether an accommodation is appropriate, the 
decision maker may ask for further information. 

(1)  However, he/she will explain to the individual seeking the accommodation, 

in specific terms, why the information provided is insufficient, what additional information is 
needed, and why it is necessary for a determination of the reasonable accommodation request. 

(2)  The individual may then ask the health care, or other appropriate medical 

professional to provide the missing information.  FEMA may submit a list of specific questions 
for this purpose. 

(3)  If, after a reasonable period of time there is still not sufficient information to 
demonstrate that the individual has a disability and needs a reasonable accommodation, the 
decision maker, in consultation with the Disability Program Manager, may request that the 
individual be examined by a physician chosen by FEMA, at FEMA’s expense. 

h.  In some cases, the individual requesting the accommodation will supply medical 
information directly to the decision maker without being asked.  In these cases, the decision 
maker will consider such documentation and if additional information is needed, the decision 
maker will follow the process as set forth in this section.  The failure to provide appropriate 
documentation or to cooperate in the Agency’s efforts to obtain such documentation can result in 
a denial of the reasonable accommodation.   

i.  Any exceptions to this process will be handled on a case-by-case basis. 

4-3.  Confidentiality Requirements.  All requests for reasonable accommodation much be kept 
confidential.  Under Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, medical information 
obtained by FEMA in connection with the reasonable accommodation process must be kept 
confidential.  This includes medical information about functional limitations and reasonable 
accommodation needs.  Requests for reasonable accommodation must also be kept in files 
separate from the individual’s personnel file.  Any FEMA employee who obtains or receives 
such information is strictly bound by these confidentiality requirements. 

 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
December 3, 2002 

FEMA Manual 1430.1 Chg.1 

4-3 

a.  The Disability Program Manager will maintain custody of all records obtained or 

created during the processing of a request for reasonable accommodation, including medical 
records, and will respond to all requests for disclosure of the records.  All records will be 
maintained in accordance with the Privacy Act, the requirements of  29 C.F.R. 1611 and this 
guidance document.  

b.  This information may be disclosed only as follows: 

(1)  Supervisors and managers who need to know may be told about necessary 
restrictions on the work or duties of the employee and about the accommodation(s), but medical 
information should only be disclosed if strictly necessary; 

(2)  First aid and safety personnel may be informed, when appropriate, should 

the disabled employee require emergency treatment; 

(3)  Government officials may be given information necessary to investigate the 

Agency’s compliance with the Rehabilitation Act; and, 

(4)  The information may, in certain circumstances, be disclosed to workers’ 

compensation offices or insurance carriers. 

 c.  Whenever medical information is disclosed, the recipient of the information must 

be informed of the confidentiality requirements. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FEMA Manual 1430.1 Chg.1 

December 3, 2002 

4-4 
Chapter 5 

Time Frames 

5-1.  Processing Requests.  FEMA will process requests for reasonable accommodation and 
provide accommodations, where they are appropriate, in as short a time frame as reasonably 
possible.  FEMA recognizes, however, that the time necessary to process a request will depend 
on the nature of the accommodation requested and whether it is necessary to obtain supporting 
information.  Time frames for processing requests and providing reasonable accommodation 
where no supporting information is required are as follows:   

a.  Requests from applicants for employment should be expedited when necessary to ensure 

the applicant’s ability to compete for the position.  However, these requests should not exceed 
ten (10) business days.   

b.  If a request from an employee is processed by the supervisor, the request should be 
processed, and the accommodation, if granted, provided within 15 business days from the date of 
receipt of the request.  Requests for accommodation should be expedited when the 
accommodation is needed to enable the employee to participate in an Agency activity scheduled 
to occur in the near future.    

(1)  If the decision maker believes that it is necessary to obtain medical information to 

determine whether the requesting individual has a disability and/or to identify the functional 
limitations, the decision maker will request the information as soon as possible after his or her 
receipt of the request for accommodation.  FEMA recognizes that the need for documentation 
may not become apparent until after the interactive process has begun. 

(2)  In cases where medical documentation is needed, the accommodation, if granted, 
will be provided within ten (10) business days for an applicant, and within 15 business days for 
an employee, from the date the decision maker receives the relevant information, absent any 
extenuating circumstances. 

c.  Where the Disability Program Manager is the decision maker on a request for 

reasonable accommodation, he/she will make a decision on the request and the accommodation, 
if granted, will be provided within 15 business days from the date of the request.  If medical 
documentation is necessary, the decision will be made within 15 business days of receipt of the 
medical information, absent any extenuating circumstances. 

5-2.  Extenuating Circumstances.  These are factors that could not reasonably have been 
anticipated or avoided in advance of the request for accommodation.  When extenuating 
circumstances are present, the time for processing a request for reasonable accommodation and 
providing the accommodation will be extended on a case-by-case basis.  Such extensions may be  

 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
December 3, 2002 

FEMA Manual 1430.1 Chg.1 

5-1 

granted by the second level supervisor, in the case of a request from an employee, and the 
Disability Program Manager, in the case of a request from an applicant.  It is FEMA’s policy that 
extensions based on extenuating circumstances should be limited to circumstances where they 
are strictly necessary.  FEMA staff is expected to act as quickly as possible in processing and 
providing accommodations.  The following are examples of extenuating circumstances: 

a.  There is an outstanding initial or follow-up request for medical information, or the 

medical information is being evaluated. 

b.  The purchase of equipment may take longer than 15 business days because of 
requirements under the Federal Acquisition Regulation and the processing of requests through 
the DOD CAP program.  Requests for computer and electronic equipment through the DOD 
CAP program are likely to take an additional 15-20 days. 

c.  Equipment is back-ordered, the vendor typically used by FEMA for goods  or services 
has unexpectedly gone out of business, or the vendor cannot promptly supply the needed goods 
or services and another vendor is not immediately available. 

d.  The employee with a disability needs to try working with equipment on a trial basis 

to ensure that it is effective before FEMA buys it. 

e.  New staff needs to be hired or contracted for, or an accommodation involves the 

removal of architectural barriers. 

f.  “Extenuating circumstances” covers limited situations in which unforeseen or 

unavoidable events prevent prompt processing and delivery of an accommodation.  For example, 
FEMA may not delay processing or providing an accommodation because a particular staff 
member is unavailable.   

(1)  Where extenuating circumstances are present, the decision maker must notify the 

individual of  the reason for the delay, and the approximate date on which a decision, or 
provision of the reasonable accommodation, is expected.  Any further developments or changes 
should also be communicated promptly to the individual. 

a.  If there is a delay in providing an accommodation that has been approved, the 

decision maker must investigate whether temporary measures can be taken to assist the 
employee.  This could include providing the requested accommodation on a temporary basis or 
providing a less effective form of accommodation.  In addition, the decision maker may provide 
measures that are not reasonable accommodations within the meaning of the law (e.g., temporary 
removal of an essential function) if:  (1) they do not interfere with the operations of the Agency; 
and, (2) the employee is clearly informed that they are being provided only on a temporary, 
interim basis. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FEMA Manual 1430.1 Chg.1 

December 3, 2002 

5-2 

(2)  If a delay is attributed to the need to obtain or evaluate medical documentation and 
FEMA has not yet determined that the individual is entitled to an accommodation, FEMA may 
provide accommodation on a temporary basis.  In this case, the decision maker will notify the 
individual in writing that the accommodation is being provided on a temporary basis pending a 
decision on the request. 

(3)  FEMA decision makers who approve temporary measures are responsible for 

assuring that they do not take the place of a permanent accommodation and that all necessary 
steps are being taken to secure a permanent accommodation. 

 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
December 3, 2002 

FEMA Manual 1430.1 Chg.1 

5-3 
Chapter 6 

Granting a Reasonable Accommodation Request 

6-1.  Granting a Request.  As soon as the decision maker determines that a reasonable 
accommodation will be provided, the decision should be immediately communicated to the 
individual.  If the accommodation cannot be provided immediately, the decision maker must 
inform the individual of the projected time frame for providing the accommodation.  This notice 
does not need to be in writing. 

6-2.  Denial of a Request.  In the case of a denial of a request for reasonable accommodation, 
the decision maker must fill out the “Management Response to Request For Reasonable 
Accommodation” form on the back of the “Request for Reasonable Accommodation” form 
(Appendix A) and provide a copy to the individual requesting the accommodation.  The denial 
should clearly state the specific reasons for the denial.  Where the decision maker has denied a 
specific requested accommodation, but offered an alternative accommodation not previously 
discussed, the denial notice should explain both the reasons for the denial and the reasons that 
the decision maker believes that the chosen accommodation will be effective.  Denial of a 
request for reasonable accommodation may include the following: 

a.  The requested accommodation and the reasons the accommodation would not be 

effective and why. 

b.  The reason the requested accommodation would result in undue hardship to the agency.  

Before reaching this determination, the decision maker must have explored whether other 
effective accommodations exist which would not impose undue hardship and therefore can be 
provided.  A determination of undue hardship means that FEMA finds that a specific 
accommodation would result in significant difficulty or expense, or would fundamentally alter 
the nature of FEMA’s operations.   

c.  Medical documentation is inadequate to establish that the individual has a disability 

and/or needs a reasonable accommodation. 

d.  The requested accommodation would require the removal of an essential job function. 

e.  The requested accommodation would require the lowering of a performance or 
production standard.  (The decision maker must understand that temporary adjustments, 
including lowering performance or production standards, are allowed during the normal course 
of business, if circumstances warrant it.  For instance, a supervisor may, if an employee is 
temporarily but seriously ill, temporarily lower a performance or production standard to 
accommodate the employee.) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FEMA Manual 1430.1 Chg.1 

December 3, 2002 

6-1 
Keep in mind that the actual notice to the individual must include specific reasons for the denial, 
for example, why the accommodation would not be effective or why it would result in undue 
hardship. 

The written notice of denial informs the individual that he/she has the right to file an Equal 
Employment Opportunity (EEO) complaint, and may have the right to pursue Merit Systems 
Protection Board (MSPB) and union grievance procedures.  The notice also explains FEMA’s 
procedures for informal dispute resolution. 

6-3.  Dispute Resolution.  Individuals with disabilities can request prompt reconsideration of a 
denial of reasonable accommodation. 

a.  If an employee is denied his/her request for reasonable accommodation, he/she may 

appeal directly to his/her second level supervisor.  The employee may present additional 
information in support of his/her request.  The second level supervisor will respond to this 
request within ten (10) business days. 

b.  If an applicant is denied his/her request for reasonable accommodation, he/she may 
appeal directly to the Disability Program Manager in the Office of Equal Rights.  The applicant 
may present additional information in support of his/her request.  The Disability Program 
Manager will respond to this request within ten (10) business days. 

c.  In an effort to resolve issues or concerns, employees or applicants can request to 

participate in the Alternative Dispute Resolution Program. 

The pursuit of any of the informal dispute resolution procedures identified above does not affect 
the time limits for initiating statutory and collective bargaining claims.  An individual’s 
participation in any or all of these informal dispute resolution processes does not satisfy the 
requirements for bringing a claim under EEO, MSPB, or union grievance procedures.   

 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
December 3, 2002 

FEMA Manual 1430.1 Chg.1 

6-2 
Chapter 7 

Claims 

7-1.  Statutory and Collective Bargaining Claims.  This policy is in addition to statutory and 
collective bargaining protections for persons with disabilities and the remedies they provide for 
the denial of requests for reasonable accommodation.  Requirements governing the initiation of 
statutory and collective bargaining claims, including time frames for filing such claims, remain 
unchanged. 

An individual who chooses to pursue statutory or collective bargaining remedies for denial of 
reasonable accommodation must: 

a.  For an EEO complaint, contact an EEO counselor within 45 days from the date of 

receipt of the written notice of denial; 

b.  For a collective bargaining claim, file a written grievance in accordance with the 

provisions of the Collective Bargaining Agreement; or, 

c.  Initiate an appeal to the Merit Systems Protection Board within 30 days of an appealable 

adverse action as defined in 5 C.F.R. 1201.3. 

If a member of the Office of Equal Rights has had any involvement in the processing of the 
request for reasonable accommodation, that staff member shall remove him or herself from any 
involvement in the processing of an EEO counseling contact or EEO complaint in connection 
with the request. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FEMA Manual 1430.1 Chg.1 

December 3, 2002 

7-1 
Chapter 8 

Assistance Information  

8-1. Tracking and Reporting.   FEMA is required to identify the following information 
regarding requests for reasonable accommodation: 

a.  The number and types of reasonable accommodation that have been requested for each 

job (occupational series, grade level), by agency component; 

b.  Whether those requests have been granted or denied; 

c.   How many of those requests relate to the benefits or privileges of employment; 

d.  The reasons for denial of requests for reasonable accommodation; 

e.   The amount of time taken to process each request for reasonable accommodation; and,  

f.   The sources of technical assistance that have been consulted in trying to identify possible 

reasonable accommodations. 

g.  The Disability Program Manager will retain for at least three (3) years information or any 

cumulative records used to track FEMA’s performance with regard to reasonable 
accommodation. 

In accordance with the information tracking requirements, the decision maker must complete the 
attached “Reasonable Accommodations Information Reporting Form” and submit it to the 
Disability Program Manager within ten (10) business days of the decision.  The decision maker 
should attach copies of all information, including medical documentation he/she received as part 
of processing the request. 

The Disability Program Manager will maintain records related to an employee’s request for 
accommodation for the duration of the employee’s tenure. 

8-2.  Inquiries.  Any person wanting further information concerning these procedures may 
contact the Disability Program Manager in the Office of Equal Rights. 

8-3.  Distribution.  These procedures will be distributed to all employees upon issuance.  They 
also will be posted on FEMA’s intranet and internet sites.  Copies also will be available in the 
Office of Equal Rights and the Human Resources Division.   

 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
December 3, 2002 

FEMA Manual 1430.1 Chg.1 

8-4.  Resource Assistance.   

8-1 

a.  Listed below are resources to assist in providing reasonable accommodations:   

(1)  Office of Equal Rights, FEMA 
202-646-3535 (Voice); 202-646-2745 (TT) 

(2)  U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
1-800-669-3362 (Voice); 1-800-800-3302 (TT) 
http://www.eeoc.gov. 

EEOC Enforcement Guidance:  Disability-Related Inquiries and Medical 
Examinations of Employees Under the Americans With Disabilities Act; 

EEOC Enforcement Guidance:  Reasonable Accommodation and Undue Hardship 
Under the Americans With Disabilities Act. 

(3)  Job Accommodation Network (JAN) 
1-800-232-9675 (Voice/TT) 
http://janweb.icdi.wvu.edu/. 

(4)  ADA Disability and Business Technical Assistance Centers (DBTACs) 
1-800-949-4232 (Voice/TT) 

(5)  Registry of Interpreters for the Deaf 
(301) 608-0050 (Voice/TT) 
http://www.rid.org 

(6)  RESNA Technical Assistance Project 
(703) 524-6686 (Voice) (703) 524-6639 (TT) 
http://www.resna.org/ 

(7)  Computer/Electronic Accommodations Program (CAP) 
703-681-8813 (Voice/TT) 
www.tricare.osd.mil/cap 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FEMA Manual 1430.1 Chg.1 

December 3, 2002 

8-2 

 
  
 
  
 
 
Department of Homeland Security 

FY 2017 

Affirmative Action Plan 
for the Recruitment, Hiring, Advancement, and
Retention of Persons with Disabilities 

SECTION I: EFFORTS TO REACH REGULATORY GOALS .....................................  2 
SECTION II: MODEL DISABILITY PROGRAM ...........................................................  3 
A. PLAN TO PROVIDE SUFFICIENT & COMPETENT STAFFING FOR DISABILITY PROGRAM ..................................................................... 

3 

B. PLAN TO ENSURE SUFFICIENT FUNDING FOR THE DISABILITY PROGRAM ........................................................................................ 

4 

SECTION III: PROGRAM DEFICIENCIES IN THE DISABILITY PROGRAM .............  4 
SECTION IV: PLAN TO RECRUIT AND HIRE INDIVIDUALS 
WITH DISABILITIES .....................................................................................................  5 
A. PLAN TO IDENTIFY JOB APPLICANTS WITH DISABILITIES .....................................................................................................................  5 

B. PLAN TO ESTABLISH CONTACTS WITH DISABILITY EMPLOYMENT ORGANIZATIONS ......................................................................... 

7 

C. PROGRESSION TOWARDS GOALS (RECRUITMENT AND HIRING) ....................................................................................................... 
SECTION V: PLAN TO ENSURE ADVANCEMENT 
OPPORTUNITIES FOR EMPLOYEES WITH DISABILITIES ......................................  8 
8 
A. ADVANCEMENT PROGRAM PLAN ...................................................................................................................................................... 

7 

B. CAREER DEVELOPMENT OPPORTUNITIES .......................................................................................................................................... 

9 

C. AWARDS .............................................................................................................................................................................................  10 

D. PROMOTIONS ....................................................................................................................................................................................  11 
SECTION VI: PLAN TO IMPROVE RETENTION OF PERSONS 
WITH DISABILITIES ....................................................................................................  16 
A. VOLUNTARY AND INVOLUNTARY SEPARATIONS ...............................................................................................................................  16 

B. ACCESSIBILITY OF TECHNOLOGY AND FACILITIES ..............................................................................................................................  17 

C. REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION PROGRAM ...................................................................................................................................  19 

D. PERSONAL ASSISTANCE SERVICES ALLOWING EMPLOYEES TO PARTICIPATE IN THE WORKPLACE ..................................................  20 
SECTION VII: EEO COMPLAINT AND FINDINGS DATA ..........................................  20 
A. EEO COMPLAINT DATA INVOLVING HARASSMENT ...........................................................................................................................  20 

B. EEO COMPLAINT DATA INVOLVING REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION ............................................................................................  21 
SECTION VIII: IDENTIFICATION AND REMOVAL OF BARRIERS .............................22 

Department of Homeland Security 

FY 2017 

Affirmative Action Plan 
for the Recruitment, Hiring, Advancement, and
Retention of Persons with Disabilities 

To capture agencies’ affirmative action plan for persons with disabilities (PWD) and 
persons with targeted disabilities (PWTD), EEOC regulations (29 C.F.R. § 1614.203(e)) 
and MD-715 require agencies to describe how their affirmative action plan will improve 
the recruitment, hiring, advancement, and retention of applicants and employees with 
disabilities. 

Section I: Efforts to Reach Regulatory Goals 

EEOC regulations (29 C.F.R. § 1614.203(d)(7)) require agencies to establish specific 
numerical goals for increasing the participation of persons with reportable and targeted 
disabilities in the federal government. 

1.  Using the goal of 12% as the benchmark, does your agency have a trigger 
involving PWD by grade level cluster in the permanent workforce? If "yes", 
describe the trigger(s) in the text box. 

a. Cluster GS-1 to GS-10 (PWD) 

b. Cluster GS-11 to SES (PWD) 

Answer: Yes 

Answer: Yes 

Based on the utilization analysis of the DHS workforce by disability grouping, PWDs 
are participating at a rate of 8.79 percent in the GS-1 to GS-10  grades, and a rate of 
10.24 percent in the GS-11 to SES grade clusters. Both rates are lower than 
expected, when compared to the 12 percent regulatory onboard goal. 

* For GS employees, please use two clusters:  GS-1 to GS-10 and GS-11 to SES, 
as set forth in 29 C.F.R. § 1614.203(d)(7).  For all other pay plans, please use the 
approximate grade clusters that are above or below GS-11 Step 1 in the 
Washington, DC metropolitan region. 

2.  Using the goal of 2% as the benchmark, does your agency have a trigger 

involving PWTD by grade level cluster in the permanent workforce? If "yes", 
describe the trigger(s) in the text box. 

a. Cluster GS-1 to GS-10 (PWTD) 

b. Cluster GS-11 to SES (PWTD) 

Answer: Yes 

Answer: Yes 

Based on the utilization analysis of the DHS workforce by disability grouping, PWTDs 
(IWTD) are participating at a rate of 1.43 percent in the GS-1 to GS-10 grades,  and at 
a rate of 1.18 percent in the GS-11 to SES grade clusters, which is lower than 
expected, when compared to the 2 percent onboard regulatory goal. 

3.  Describe how the agency has communicated the numerical goals to the hiring 

managers and/or recruiters. 

Annual hiring goals for individuals with disabilities and targeted disabilities are formally 
announced in conjunction with the Veterans hiring goals on an annual basis from the 
DHS OCHCO to all DHS Components via the Human Capital Leadership Council 
(HCLC), which is composed of the senior human capital officials in OCHCO, the DHS 
Components, and other lines of business. The goals are further communicated to the 

2 

Department of Homeland Security 

FY 2017 

Components’ EEO and Diversity officials and staff, to be socialized and implemented 
throughout the Components with human resources, EEO, and Diversity practitioners 
and hiring officials. 

Section II: Model Disability Program 

Pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.203(d)(1), agencies must ensure sufficient staff, training and 
resources to recruit and hire persons with disabilities and persons with targeted disabilities, 
administer the reasonable accommodation program and special emphasis program, and 
oversee any other disability hiring and advancement program the agency has in place. 

A. PLAN TO PROVIDE SUFFICIENT & COMPETENT STAFFING FOR 
DISABILITY PROGRAM 

1.  Has the agency designated sufficient qualified personnel to implement its 

disability program during the reporting period? If “no”, describe the agency’s 
plan to improve the staffing for the upcoming year. 

Answer: Yes 

CRCL’s, Equal Employment Opportunity and Diversity Division, has a full-time 
Departmental Disability Employment Program Manager who is responsible for 
implementing and maturing the DHS Disability Employment Program.  Also at the 
DHS level, (OCHCO’s SRDI) has two assigned employees to support disability 
recruitment, career development, and retention programs across DHS. 
All DHS Components have identified personnel for the following programs:  Selective 
Placement Program, Disability Employment Program, Reasonable Accommodation 
Program, and the Operations Warfighter Program. 

2. 

Identify all staff responsible for implementing the agency’s disability 
employment program by the office, staff employment status, and responsible 
official. 

Disability Program Task 

# of FTE Staff by
Employment Status 

Responsible Official
(Name, Title, Office, Email) 

Full Time 

Part Time 

Collateral Duty 

Processing applications 
from PWD and PWTD 
Answering questions from 
the public about hiring 
authorities that take 
disability into account 
Processing reasonable 
accommodation requests 
from applicants and 
employees 
Section 508 Compliance 

Architectural Barriers Act 
Compliance 
Special Emphasis Program 
for PWD and PWTD 

123 

132 

18 

62 

110 

8 

9 

9 

0 

0 

0 

0 

28 

29 

25 

0 

0 

0 

See full report for list of 
responsible officials.
See full report for list of 
responsible officials. 

See full report for list of 
responsible officials. 

See full report for list of 
responsible officials.
See full report for list of 
responsible officials.
See full report for list of 
responsible officials. 

3.  Has the agency provided disability program staff with sufficient training to carry 
out their responsibilities during the reporting period?  If “yes”, describe the 
training(s) that disability program staff have received.  If “no”, describe the 
training(s) planned for the upcoming year. 

3 

Department of Homeland Security 

FY 2017 

Answer: Yes 

DHS CRCL/EEOD provided continuous training and guidance to all responsible staff 
to ensure they have the most up-to-date information and resources to carry out their 
responsibilities effectively, to include:

 •  Leading Quarterly Disability Employment Advisory Council meetings covering 

ongoing program guidance, updates, and sharing of best practices across DHS 
Components.

 •  Participation in the Federal Exchange on Employment & Disability (FEED), a 
Federal Interagency working group focused on information sharing, best practices, 
and collaborative partnerships designed to make the Federal Government a model 
employer of people with disabilities. 
Developed and delivered DHS Selective Placement Program Coordinator training to 
all identified Selective Placement Program Coordinators and Disability Program 
Managers. 

B. PLAN TO ENSURE SUFFICIENT FUNDING FOR THE DISABILITY 
PROGRAM 

Has the agency provided sufficient funding and other resources to successfully implement the 
disability program during the reporting period? If “no”, describe the agency’s plan to ensure all 
aspects of the disability program have sufficient funding and other resources. 

Eight of the nine DHS Components responded Yes. 

Answer: Yes 

Additionally, in support of meeting this measure, CRCL continued efforts during FY 
2017, to encourage all DHS Components to utilize the Accessibility Compliance 
Management System (ACMS) to manage and track reasonable accommodations.  As 
of January 2018, six out of nine Components are successfully using ACMS. 

Section III: Program Deficiencies in the Disability Program 

In Part G of its FY 2017 MD-715 report, the agency identified the following program 
deficiencies involving its disability program: 

Program Deficiencies 

Agency Comments 

Have the procedures for reasonable 
accomodation for individuals with 
disabilities been made readily 
available/accessible to all employees 
by disseminating such procedures 
during orientation of new employees 
and by making such procedures 
available on the World Wide Web or 
Internet? 

Are 90% of accommodation requests 
processed within the frame set forth 
in the agency procedures for 
reasonable accommodation? 

HQ has not met this measure. 

CBP and ICE have not met this measure. 

4 

 
 
Department of Homeland Security 

FY 2017 

Program Deficiencies 

Agency Comments 

Does the agency review disability 
accommodation decisions/actions to 
ensure compliance with its written 
procedures and analyze the 
information tracked for trends, 
problems, etc.? 

FEMA and HQ have not met this measure. 

Section IV: Plan to Recruit and Hire Individuals with Disabilities 

Pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.203(d)(1)(i) and (ii), agencies must establish a plan to increase 
the recruitment and hiring of individuals with disabilities.  The questions below are designed to 
identify outcomes of the agency’s recruitment program plan for PWD and PWTD. 

A. PLAN TO IDENTIFY JOB APPLICANTS WITH DISABILITIES 

1.  Describe the programs and resources the agency uses to identify job 

applicants with disabilities, including individuals with targeted disabilities. 

DHS implemented a CRC, comprising recruiting personnel from DHS Components 
and led by OCHCO, Strategic Recruitment, Diversity and Inclusion to identify and 
monitor disability recruiting programs and resources.  The Recruitment Outreach 
Marketing Matrix (ROMM) is used to monitor all DHS activities. The CRC also assists 
with the implementation of the Strategic Outreach and Recruitment Plan (SOAR).  In 
FY 2017, the CRC continued to maintain a Top 25 list of recruiting events to attend. 
From this list, OCHCO identified a priority subset for DHS-wide coordination, focusing 
on DHS mission-critical occupations (predominantly law enforcement). 
In FY 2017, DHS participated in 91 events targeting veterans with disabilities and 14 
events targeting individuals with disabilities (IWD) and targeted disabilities (IWTD). 
Events targeting IWD and IWTD included:

 •  Illinois Vocational Rehabilitation, Chicago, IL
 •  Minnesota Vocational Rehabilitation Agency, Saint Paul, MN
 •  Rotary Career Fair, Bellingham, WA
 •  Snohomish Career Fair, Marysville, WA
 •  Non-Competitive Hiring Fair, St. Paul, MN
 •  Advancement Via Individual Determination Classes, San Antonio, TX
 •  Gallaudet University Spring Career Fair, Washington, DC (multiple Component 

attendance)

 •  Employment Opportunity Information Sessions at Gallaudet, Washington, DC
 •  International Technology & Persons with Disabilities  Conference, San Diego, CA
 •  Bender Disability Virtual Career Fair, Virtual
 •  Schedule A Targeted Hiring Event, Lyndhurst, NJ 

Additionally, DHS conducted the following activities:

 •  Provided two information sessions for three classes in February 2017 and 

September 2017 at Gallaudet University to discuss objectives with college students 
including the Workforce Recruitment Program (WRP), the Pathways program, how to 
apply non-competitive jobs via USAJOBS, how to obtain a Schedule A letter from 
medical professionals or rehabilitation offices, and professionalism. 

5 

 
 
Department of Homeland Security 

FY 2017 

•  In support of the DOL’s Workforce Recruitment Program, conducted 

approximately 40 telephone interviews with students from the National Technology 
Institute of the Deaf, Touro Law School, and the University of San Francisco.  As 
WRP recruiters, candidate profiles were developed, as well as recommendations for 
further referral for the WRP 2018 database. 

2.  Pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.203(a)(3), describe the agency’s use of hiring 
authorities that take disability into account (e.g., Schedule A) to recruit PWD 
and PWTD for positions in the permanent workforce. 

DHS uses the following hiring authorities to hire individuals with disabilities into 
temporary and permanent positions: 
• 
316.402, and 315.707) 
• 

Schedule A Appointing Authority (5 C.F.R. § 213.3102(u))

30 percent or More Disabled Veteran (5 U.S.C. 3112; 5 C.F.R. 316.302, 

3.  When individuals apply for a position under a hiring authority that takes 

disability into account (e.g., Schedule A), explain how the agency (1) 
determines if the individual is eligible for appointment under such authority and 
(2) forwards the individual's application to the relevant hiring officials with an 
explanation of how and when the individual may be appointed. 

Each DHS Component utilizes both the Schedule A appointing authority, and the 30 
percent or More Disabled Veteran authority. Component Selective Placement 
Program Coordinators and Veterans Employment Program Managers handle 
coordination of applicants who qualify under non-competitive authorities. 

The Department recognizes that while it has an established policy on administering 
the employment of veterans, it does not currently have a policy covering the Schedule 
A Appointment Authority for Individuals with Disabilities.  DHS will continue to explore 
the feasibility of developing a DHS Schedule A policy during FY 2018. 

For detailed procedures on how DHS Components are handling and processing 
applicants eligible under both Schedule A and the 30 percent or More Disabled 
Veteran authority, please refer to each Component’s MD-715 report. 

4.  Has the agency provided training to all hiring managers on the use of hiring 

authorities that take disability into account (e.g., Schedule A)? If “yes”, describe 
the type(s) of training and frequency.  If “no”, describe the agency’s plan to 
provide this training. 

Answer: Yes 

DHS developed training for all hiring managers and human resources professionals 
entitled, “Employment of People with Disabilities: A Roadmap to Success,” which 
includes information on Schedule A hiring authority as well as Veterans hiring 
authorities that take disability into account. The training is mandatory and must be 
taken sixty (60) days from employment and every two years thereafter. 

The Roadmap to Success training was updated during FY 2017 to include the 
provision of the Final Rule covering Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act, as well as 
other necessary revisions.  DHS plans to revise this training course over the next two 
years. 

6 

 
 
 
Department of Homeland Security 

FY 2017 

B. PLAN TO ESTABLISH CONTACTS WITH DISABILITY EMPLOYMENT 
ORGANIZATIONS 

Describe the agency’s efforts to establish and maintain contacts with organizations that assist 
PWD, including PWTD, in securing and maintaining employment. 

The CRC coordinated participation in recruiting events at Gallaudet University, 
California State Northridge, the National Technical Institute for the Deaf, the Bender 
Virtual Career Fair, and recruiting and outreach events for disabled veterans through 
Operation Warfighter and Wounded Warrior programs. 
A pilot non-paid internship program was also initiated during the summer in FY 2017, 
with CRCL and the Maryland Department of Rehabilitation Services, resulting in three 
offers of full-time employment.  DHS plans to expand and encourage Component 
participation to increase employment opportunities throughout DHS. 

C. PROGRESSION TOWARDS GOALS (RECRUITMENT AND HIRING) 
1.  Using the goals of 12% for PWD and 2% for PWTD as the benchmarks, do 
triggers exist for PWD and/or PWTD among the new hires in the permanent 
workforce? If “yes”, please describe the triggers below. 

a. New Hires for Permanent Workforce (PWD) 

Answer: No 

b. New Hires for Permanent Workforce (PWTD)  Answer: Yes 

During FY 2017, DHS exceeded the 12 percent hiring goal for IWD, representing 
12.04 percent of all new hires.  DHS did not reach the 2 percent hiring goal for IWTD. 
IWTD represented 1.14 percent of all new hires, which falls below the 2 percent hiring 
goal. 

Disability workforce data includes employees who self-identify as having a disability 
and employees appointed under Schedule A and 30 percent or more Disabled 

2.  Using the qualified applicant pool as the benchmark, do triggers exist for PWD 
and/or PWTD among the new hires for any of the mission-critical occupations 
(MCO)? If “yes”, please describe the triggers below. 

a. New Hires for MCO (PWD) 

b. New Hires for MCO (PWTD) 

Answer: No 

Answer: Yes 

Based on a review of B7 Applications and Hires which represents AFD and hires for 
Components (CBP, HQ, ICE, USCIS, and FEMA) that are using USA Staffing Cognos, 
triggers exist for the following occupations of the 10 Major Occupational 
Classifications for IWTDs: 
1802-Compliance Inspection and Support: Qualified 1.54 percent; Selections 0.69 
percent 
1895-Customs and Border Protection:  Qualified 0.51 percent; Selections 0.00 percent 
1896-Border Patrol Agent:  Qualified 0.73 percent; Selections 0.00 percent 
0343-Management and Program  Analysis:  Qualified 2.35 percent; Selections 1.98 
percent 
2210-Information Technology Management:  Qualified 1.16 percent; Selections 0.90 
percent 

3.  Using the relevant applicant pool as the benchmark, do triggers exist for PWD 
and/or PWTD among the qualified internal applicants for any of the mission-

7 

 
Department of Homeland Security 

FY 2017 

critical occupations (MCO)? If “yes”, please describe the triggers below. 

a. Qualified Applicants for MCO (PWD) 

Answer: No 

b. Qualified Applicants for MCO (PWTD) 

Answer: No 

Relevant applicant pool data is not available.  Identifying which current DHS 
employees would qualify for a job series they are not currently in is a difficult 
undertaking.  The Human Capital offices do not adjudicate applicant qualifications until 
an applicant applies for a specific position, and the applicant may qualify based on 
experience obtained prior to entry into their current job series, or into DHS.  DHS has 
not attempted to develop an estimate for job series-relevant applicant pools to date. 
In FY 2018, DHS will work to determine whether there is a way to develop the relevant 
internal applicant pool percentages for each series. 

4.  Using the qualified applicant pool as the benchmark, do triggers exist for PWD 
and/or PWTD among employees promoted to any of the mission-critical 
occupations (MCO)? If “yes”, please describe the triggers below. 

a. Promotions for MCO (PWD) 

b. Promotions for MCO (PWTD) 

Answer: Yes 

Answer: Yes 

Based on a review of B9 Selections for Internal Competitive Promotions for Major 
Occupations, which represents AFD and selections for Components (CBP, HQ, ICE, 
USCIS, and FEMA) that are using USA Staffing Cognos, triggers exist for the 
following occupations for IWD and IWTDs when comparing the qualified applicant pool 
to the number of selections for promotions: 
IWD 
1896-Border Patrol Agent:  Qualified 2.98 percent; Selections  2.30 percent 
IWTD 
1801-General Inspection, Investigation, & Compliance: Qualified 3.56 percent; 
Selections 1.95 percent 
1895-Customs and Border Protection: Qualified 1.69 percent; Selections 0.06 percent 
1896-Border Patrol Agent:  Qualified 1.53 percent; Selections  0.31 percent 

Section V: Plan to Ensure Advancement Opportunities for 
Employees with Disabilities 

Pursuant to 29 C.F.R §1614.203(d)(1)(iii), agencies are required to provide sufficient 
advancement opportunities for employees with disabilities.  Such activities might include 
specialized training and mentoring programs, career development opportunities, awards 
programs, promotions, and similar programs that address advancement. In this section, 
agencies should identify, and provide data on programs designed to ensure advancement 
opportunities for employees with disabilities. 

A.  ADVANCEMENT PROGRAM PLAN 

Describe the agency's plan to ensure PWD, including PWTD, have sufficient opportunities for 
advancement. 

All managers and supervisors are encouraged to promote the career development of 
all employees, including individuals with disabilities and individuals with targeted 
disabilities. 

8 

Department of Homeland Security 

FY 2017 

B.  CAREER DEVELOPMENT OPPORTUNITIES 

1.  Please describe the career development opportunities that the agency provides 

to its employees. 

DHS hosted the Third Annual DHS Education Fair on September 21, 2017 in 
Washington, D.C., which included over 30 colleges and universities offering 
information on degrees and certifications available to DHS employees and family 
members. 225 employees and family members attended in person, and 100 
employees participated by webinar. DHS Components continue to promote 
participation in their training and career development and academic programs through 
their internal Component websites and employee communications channels. 
Additionally, DHS employees have access to training/career development courses 
such as DHS’s Senior Executive Service Candidate Development Program. DHS, in 
partnership with SkillSoft, offers approximately 20,000 online learning resources. 
Employees can use these online resources as quick references, practical job aids to 
gain in-depth knowledge, or skill practice. These resources are mapped to support 
competencies, job roles, or blended learning offerings. 
The DHS Mentoring Program is a formal program that provides enriching experiences 
through reciprocal relationships and opportunities for personal and professional 
growth while sharing knowledge, leveraging skills, and cultivating talent. The DHS 
Mentoring Program is open to all DHS federal employees. The Undersecretary for 
Management announces mentoring opportunities and provides training to mentors. 
Types of mentoring include: Speed Mentoring, Flash Mentoring, Situational Mentoring, 
Reverse Mentoring, Group Mentoring, and Peer Mentoring. The program is evaluated, 
and feedback is provided on its successes, along with areas requiring improvement. 
The OCHCO Strategic Learning Development and Engagement Division is exercising 
option year four (2017-2018) of the Mentoring Connection contract. In FY 2017, the 
DHS Mentoring programs coordinated over ninety (90) mentoring/mentee 
partnerships. 

2.  Do triggers exist for PWD among the applicants and/or selectees for any of the 
career development programs? (The appropriate benchmarks are the relevant 
applicant pool for applicants and the applicant pool for selectees.)  If "yes", 
describe the trigger(s) in the text box. 

a. Applicants (PWD) 

b. Selections (PWD) 

Answer: No 

Answer: No 

Detailed applicant flow data (AFD) for the career development programs identified 
above are not available at the DHS  level.  DHS CRCL will continue to coordinate 
efforts with OCHCO and OPM to acquire access to applicant flow data as identified in 
the planned activities. 
During FY 2017, AFD data were not available to conduct an analysis of the applicants 
and selections for development programs identified above by the required 
benchmarks. However, when comparing the number of selections for PWD to the 12 
percent goal, PWD (IWD) were selected at rates significantly below those expected in 
the reported mentoring programs and the SES CDP program. 

3.  Do triggers exist for PWTD among the applicants and/or selectees for any of 

the career development programs identified? (The appropriate benchmarks are 
the relevant applicant pool for applicants and the applicant pool for selectees.) 
If "yes", describe the trigger(s) in the text box. 

9 

Department of Homeland Security 

FY 2017 

a. Applicants (PWTD) 

b. Selections (PWTD) 

Answer: No 

Answer: No 

Detailed applicant flow data (AFD) for the career development programs identified 
above are not available at the DHS  level.  DHS CRCL will continue to coordinate 
efforts with OCHCO and OPM to acquire access to applicant flow data as identified in 
the planned activities. 

During FY 2017, AFD data were not available to conduct an analysis of the applicants 
and selections for development programs identified above by the required 
benchmarks.  When comparing the number of selections for PWTDs (IWTD) to the 2 
percent goal, PWTDs (IWTD) are exceeding in all programs with the exception of the 
Pathways-Recent Graduates program. 

C. AWARDS 

1.  Using the inclusion rate as the benchmark, does your agency have a trigger 

involving PWD and/or PWTD for any level of the time-off awards, bonuses, or 
other incentives?  If "yes", please describe the trigger(s) in the text box. 

a. Awards, Bonuses, & Incentives (PWD) 

Answer: Yes 

b. Awards, Bonuses, & Incentives (PWTD) 

Answer: Yes 

Based on a review of MD-715 Table B13: Employee Recognition and Awards -
Distribution by Disability, PWD (IWD) and PWTD (IWTD) are not receiving awards at 
the expected rates when compared to the corresponding inclusion rate.  DHS-wide, 
this was identified for the following categories: 
IWD 
1-9 hours: 
34.52% 
Cash awards 1 – $500: 
26.63% 
Cash awards $500 +: 
59.85% 

IWD Inclusion Rate: 26.87% 

IWD Inclusion Rate: 50.41% 

IWD Inclusion Rate: 21.65% 

IWOD Inclusion Rate: 

IWOD Inclusion Rate: 

IWOD Inclusion Rate: 

Benchmark 

IWTD 
1-9 hours: 
34.52% 
9+ hours: 
26.49% 
Cash awards $500 +: 
59.85% 

Inclusion Rate: 34.03% 

IWOD Inclusion Rate: 

Benchmark 

Inclusion Rate: 25.40% 

IWOD Inclusion Rate: 

Inclusion Rate: 47.37% 

IWOD Inclusion Rate: 

2.  Using the inclusion rate as the benchmark, does your agency have a trigger 

involving PWD and/or PWTD for quality step increases or performance-based 
pay increases? If "yes", please describe the trigger(s) in the text box. 

a. Pay Increases (PWD) 

b. Pay Increases (PWTD) 

Answer: No 

Answer: No 

Based on a review of MD-715 Table B13: Employee Recognition and Awards -
Distribution by Disability, PWDs (IWD) and PWTD (IWTD) are exceeding the inclusion 
rate benchmark for quality step increase (QSIs). 

10 

 
 
Department of Homeland Security 

FY 2017 

QSI Awards 

IWD Inclusion Rate: 
 IWTD Inclusion Rate: 
IWOD Inclusion Rate: 

1.16%
1.53% 
0.74% 

Benchmark 
Further review indicates 4 out of 9 Components have triggers in this award category. 

3. 

If the agency has other types of employee recognition programs, are PWD 
and/or PWTD recognized disproportionately less than employees without 
disabilities? (The appropriate benchmark is the inclusion rate.) If "yes", 
describe the employee recognition program and relevant data in the text box. 

a. Other Types of Recognition (PWD) 

Answer: N/A 

b. Other Types of Recognition (PWTD) 

Answer: N/A 

DHS did not have any other types of recognition programs during FY 17. 

D. PROMOTIONS 

1.  Does your agency have a trigger involving PWD among the qualified internal 

applicants and/or selectees for promotions to the senior grade levels? (The 
appropriate benchmarks are the relevant applicant pool for qualified internal 
applicants and the qualified applicant pool for selectees.) For non-GS pay 
plans, please use the approximate senior grade levels. If "yes", describe the 
trigger(s) in the text box. 

a.  SES 

i. Qualified Internal Applicants (PWD) 

ii. Internal Selections (PWD) 

Answer: No 

Answer: No 

b.  Grade GS-15 

i.￿Qualified Internal Applicants (PWD) 

ii. Internal Selections (PWD) 

Answer: Yes 

Answer: No 

c.  Grade GS-14 

i.￿Qualified Internal Applicants (PWD) 

ii. Internal Selections (PWD) 

Answer: Yes 

Answer: No 

d.  Grade GS-13 

i.￿Qualified Internal Applicants (PWD) 

ii. Internal Selections (PWD) 

Answer: Yes 

Answer: No 

Based on a review of MD-715 Table B11: Internal Selections for Senior Level 
Positions (GS 13, 14, 15, and SES) - Distribution by Disability, PWD (IWD) 
participation rates within the Qualified Internal Applicants indicate triggers for Grades 
GS-13 through GS-15. However, data shows rates for these selections exceeded their 
corresponding qualified applicant percentages, indicating no trigger for internal 
selections. 
DHS SES positions were all announced and open to the public during FY 2017. DHS 
is unable to determine the percentage of qualitied internal applicants by disability 

11 

Department of Homeland Security 

FY 2017 

distribution, due to limited applicant flow data available.  However, when comparing 
the percentage of SES selections to the relevant applicant pool as an alternative 
comparator, selections for PWD (IWD) were lower than expected. 
IWD SES Selections: 
12.00% 

IWD Relevant Applicant Pool: 

3.57% 

2.  Does your agency have a trigger involving PWTD among the qualified internal 
applicants and/or selectees for promotions to the senior grade levels? (The 
appropriate benchmarks are the relevant applicant pool for qualified internal 
applicants and the qualified applicant pool for selectees.)  For non-GS pay 
plans, please use the approximate senior grade levels. If "yes", describe the 
trigger(s) in the text box. 

a.  SES 

i. Qualified Internal Applicants (PWTD) 

ii. Internal Selections (PWTD) 

Answer: No 

Answer: No 

b.  Grade GS-15 

i.￿Qualified Internal Applicants (PWTD) 

Answer: Yes 

ii. Internal Selections (PWTD) 

Answer: No 

c.  Grade GS-14 

i.￿Qualified Internal Applicants (PWTD) 

Answer: Yes 

ii. Internal Selections (PWTD) 

Answer: No 

d.  Grade GS-13 

i.￿Qualified Internal Applicants (PWTD) 

Answer: Yes 

ii. Internal Selections (PWTD) 

Answer: No 

Based on a review of MD-715 Table B11: Internal Selections for Senior Level 
Positions (GS 13, 14, 15, and SES) - Distribution by Disability, PWTD (IWTD) 
participation rates within the Qualified Internal Applicants indicate triggers for Grades 
GS-13 through GS-15. However, as with IWD, data reveal rates for these selections 
exceeded their corresponding qualified applicant percentages, indicating no trigger for 
internal selections. 
DHS SES positions were all announced and open to the public during FY 2017. DHS 
is unable to determined, due to limited applicant flow data available, the percentage of 
qualified internal applicants by disability distribution.  However, when comparing the 
percentage of SES selections to the relevant applicant pool as an alternative 
comparator, selections for PWTD (IWTD) were lower than expected. 
IWTD SES Selections: 
1.00% 

IWTD Relevant Applicant Pool: 

0.00% 

12 

Department of Homeland Security 

FY 2017 

3.  Using the qualified applicant pool as the benchmark, does your agency have a 
trigger involving PWD among the new hires to the senior grade levels? For 
non-GS pay plans, please use the approximate senior grade levels. If "yes", 
describe the trigger(s) in the text box. 

a. New Hires to SES (PWD) 

b. New Hires to GS-15 (PWD) 

c. New Hires to GS-14 (PWD) 

d. New Hires to GS-13 (PWD) 

Answer: No 

Answer: No 

Answer: No 

Answer: No 

DHS was unable to analyze new hires for PWD (IWD), as compared to the required 
benchmark using applicant flow data. 

However, based on a review of MD-715 Table B8: New Hires by Type of Appointment, 
filtered down by hires for Senior Level Positions (GS 13, 14, 15, and SES) -
Distribution by Disability, PWD (IWD) exceeded the 12 percent goal for all grades with 
the exception of SES new hires. 

Regulatory Goal 
New Hires to SES 
New Hires to GS-15 
New Hires to GS-14 
New Hires to GS-13 

Hires 

Qualified Applicant Pool 

9.52% 
20.73% 
20.41% 
21.00% 

Not Available 
Not Available 
Not Available 
Not Available 

12% 
12% 
12% 
12% 

4.  Using the qualified applicant pool as the benchmark, does your agency have a 

trigger involving PWTD among the new hires to the senior grade levels? For 
non-GS pay plans, please use the approximate senior grade levels. If "yes", 
describe the trigger(s) in the text box. 

a. New Hires to SES (PWTD) 

b. New Hires to GS-15 (PWTD) 

c. New Hires to GS-14 (PWTD) 

d. New Hires to GS-13 (PWTD) 

Answer: No 

Answer: No 

Answer: Yes 

Answer: Yes 

DHS was unable to analyze new hires for PWTD (IWTD), as compared to the required 
benchmark using applicant flow data. 

However, based on a review of MD-715 Table B8: New Hires by Type of Appointment, 
filtered down by hires for Senior Level Positions (GS 13, 14, 15, and SES) -
Distribution by Disability, PWTD (IWTD) exceeded the 2 percent goal for grades GS 
15 and SES.  While the percentages of new hires for GS-13 and GS-14 were notable, 
DHS did not meet the 2 percent goal. 

Regulatory Goal 
New Hires to SES 
New Hires to GS-15 
New Hires to GS-14 
New Hires to GS-13 

Hires 

Qualified Applicant Pool 

4.76% 
2.59% 
1.54% 
1.98% 

Not Available 
Not Available 
Not Available 
Not Available 

2% 
2% 
2% 
2% 

13 

 
 
 
 
Department of Homeland Security 

FY 2017 

5.  Does your agency have a trigger involving PWD among the qualified internal 
applicants and/or selectees for promotions to supervisory positions? (The 
appropriate benchmarks are the relevant applicant pool for qualified internal 
applicants and the qualified applicant pool for selectees.)  If "yes", describe the 
trigger(s) in the text box. 

a.  Executives 

i. Qualified Internal Applicants (PWD) 

Answer: No 

ii. Internal Selections (PWD) 

Answer: Yes 

b.  Managers 

i.￿Qualified Internal Applicants (PWD) 

ii. Internal Selections (PWD) 

Answer: No 

Answer: Yes 

c.  Supervisors 

i.￿Qualified Internal Applicants (PWD) 

ii. Internal Selections (PWD) 

Answer: No 

Answer: No 

Due to the limited availability of applicant flow data, DHS is unable to identify the 
participation rates by disability distribution for qualified internal applicants.  When 
reviewing the internal selections, and using the relevant applicant pool as an 
alternative comparator, triggers were identified for promotions to Executive (GS 15 
and above) and Manager (Mid-Level Grades 13-14) positions. No trigger was 
identified for Supervisors (First-Level Grades 12 and Below) positions. 

PWD (IWD) Executive Selections: 2.58% 
Pool: 
PWD (IWD) Manager Selections:  7.58% 
Pool: 

10.00% 

9.00% 

PWD (IWD) Relevant Applicant 

PWD (IWD) Relevant Applicant 

14 

 
Department of Homeland Security 

FY 2017 

6.  Does your agency have a trigger involving PWTD among the qualified internal 
applicants and/or selectees for promotions to supervisory positions? (The 
appropriate benchmarks are the relevant applicant pool for qualified internal 
applicants and the qualified applicant pool for selectees.)  If "yes", describe the 
trigger(s) in the text box. 

a.  Executives 

i. Qualified Internal Applicants (PWTD) 

ii. Internal Selections (PWTD) 

b.  Managers 

i.￿Qualified Internal Applicants (PWTD) 

ii. Internal Selections (PWTD) 

c.  Supervisors 

i.￿Qualified Internal Applicants (PWTD) 

ii. Internal Selections (PWTD) 

Answer: No 

Answer: No 

Answer: No 

Answer: No 

Answer: No 

Answer: No 

Due to the limited availability of applicant flow data, DHS is unable to identify the 
participation rates by disability distribution for qualified internal applicants.  When 
reviewing the internal selections and using the relevant applicant pool as an 
alternative comparator, no triggers were identified for promotions to supervisory 
positions. 

7.  Using the qualified applicant pool as the benchmark, does your agency have a 
trigger involving PWD among the selectees for new hires to supervisory 
positions? If "yes", describe the trigger(s) in the text box. 

a. New Hires for Executives (PWD) 

b. New Hires for Managers (PWD) 

c. New Hires for Supervisors (PWD) 

Answer: No 

Answer: No 

Answer: No 

Due to the limited availability of applicant flow data, DHS is unable to identify the 
participation rates by disability distribution for qualified applicants.  When reviewing 
the new hires and using the relevant applicant pool as an alternative comparator, no 
triggers were identified for hires to supervisory positions for PWD (IWD). 

8.  Using the qualified applicant pool as the benchmark, does your agency have a 
trigger involving PWTD among the selectees for new hires to supervisory 
positions? If "yes", describe the trigger(s) in the text box. 

a. New Hires for Executives (PWTD) 

b. New Hires for Managers (PWTD) 

c. New Hires for Supervisors (PWTD) 

Answer: No 

Answer: No 

Answer: No 

Due to the limited availability of applicant flow data, DHS is unable to identify the 
participation rates by disability distribution for qualified applicants.  When reviewing 

15 

Department of Homeland Security 

FY 2017 

the new hires and using the relevant applicant pool as an alternative comparator, no 
triggers were identified for hires to supervisory positions for PWTD (IWTD). 

Section VI: Plan to Improve Retention of Persons with Disabilities 

To be a model employer for persons with disabilities, agencies must have policies and 
programs in place to retain employees with disabilities. In this section, agencies should: (1) 
analyze workforce separation data to identify barriers retaining employees with disabilities; (2) 
describe efforts to ensure accessibility of technology and facilities; and (3) provide information 
on the reasonable accommodation program and workplace personal assistance services. 

A. VOLUNTARY AND INVOLUNTARY SEPARATIONS 

1. 

In this reporting period, did the agency convert all eligible Schedule A 
employees with a disability into the competitive service after two years of 
satisfactory service (5 C.F.R. § 213.3102(u)(6)(i))? If "no", please explain why 
the agency did not convert all eligible Schedule A employees. 

Answer: No 

During FY 2017, DHS converted a total of 101 of 189 eligible Schedule A employees 
(Permanent and Temporary) to the Competitive Service, representing 53 percent 
conversion rate. 
DHS will continue to educate supervisors and monitor progress. 
Based on DHS Component-level reporting, three out of nine Components indicated no 
trigger. 

2.  Using the inclusion rate as the benchmark, did the percentage of PWD among 

voluntary and involuntary separations exceed that of persons without 
disabilities? If "yes", describe the trigger below. 

a. Voluntary Separations (PWD) 

b. Involuntary Separations (PWD) 

Answer: Yes 

Answer: No 

Based on a review of MD-715 Table B14: Separations by Type of Separation -
Distribution by Disability, IWD are exceeding the inclusion rate benchmark for 
voluntary separations. 
Voluntary Separations 
Benchmark 
Further review indicates four out of nine DHS Components have triggers in both 
voluntary and involuntary separations. 

PWD (IWD) Inclusion Rate: 
PWOD (IWOD) Inclusion Rate: 

6.75% 
5.71% 

3.  Using the inclusion rate as the benchmark, did the percentage of PWTD among 

voluntary and involuntary separations exceed that of persons without targeted 
disabilities? If "yes", describe the trigger below. 

a. Voluntary Separations (PWTD) 

b. Involuntary Separations (PWTD) 

Answer: Yes 

Answer: Yes 

Based on a review of MD-715 Table B14: Separations by Type of Separation -
Distribution by Disability, IWTDs are exceeding the inclusion rate benchmark for both 
voluntary and involuntary separations. 
Voluntary Separations 
Benchmark 

PWTD (IWTD) Inclusion Rate: 
PWTD (IWOD) Inclusion Rate: 

8.16% 
5.71% 

16 

Department of Homeland Security 

FY 2017 

Involuntary Separations  PWTD (IWTD) Inclusion Rate: 
Benchmark 
PWOD (IWOD) Inclusion Rate: 
Further review indicates four out of nine DHS Components have triggers in voluntary 
separations, and two out of nine indicate triggers for involuntary separations. 

0.93% 

0.73% 

4. 

If a trigger exists involving the separation rate of PWD and/or PWTD, please 
explain why they left the agency using exit interview results and other data 
sources. 

Based on a limited analysis of the DHS exit survey data, which includes all 
Components with the exception of TSA and USSS, approximately 12 percent of all 
employees separating completed the exit survey during the first and second quarters 
of FY 2017 resulting in a total of 3611 response.  Of those responses, only 398 or 11 
percent of the respondents, indicated they had a disability. 
Of the respondents who indicated they had a disability, the top three reasons for 
leaving other than retirement included: 
Supervision/Management –11.3% 
Personal/Family Related – 9.6% 
Advancement Opportunities – 9.3% 
The top reasons mentioned above are the same as PWOD (IWOD), with the 
exception of moving to another DHS Component/Office at 10.1%. 
When comparing the response rates for leaving based on health-related reasons, 
PWD (IWD) had an 8% response rate compared to a 1.1% response rate for IWODs. 
Further review revealed a 3% response rate for employees indicating they had a 
targeted disability. 
Of the respondents who indicated they had a targeted disability, the top three reasons 
for leaving included: 
Supervision/Management – 13.8% 
Salary/Pay – 11.0% 
Personal/Family Related and Work Environment – tied at 9.2% 
Advancement opportunities and health related reasons are next at 8.3%. 

B. ACCESSIBILITY OF TECHNOLOGY AND FACILITIES 

Pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.203(d)(4), federal agencies are required to inform job applicants 
and employees of their rights under Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. § 
794(b)), concerning the accessibility of agency technology, and the Architectural Barriers Act of 
1968 (42 U.S.C. § 4151 – 4157), concerning the accessibility of agency facilities. In addition, 
agencies are required to inform individuals where to file complaints if other agencies are 
responsible for a violation. 

1.  Please provide the internet address on the agency's public website for its 

notice explaining employees' and applicants' rights under Section 508 of the 
Rehabilitation Act, including a description of how to file a complaint. 

DHS Accessibility Website address: 

https://www.dhs.gov/accessibility 

The DHS web page for accessibility does not currently include a description of how to 
file a Section 508 complaint.  However, the page does provide an option for the user 
to submit an automated comment to describe the user’s accessibility issue and offers 
the user an option to provide recommendations to improve accessibility. 
DHS CRCL will collaborate with the Office of Accessible Systems and Technology to 
update the page to include a notice of rights under Section 508, including a 

17 

 
 
Department of Homeland Security 

FY 2017 

description of how to file a complaint during FY 2018.  Currently, Section 508 
complaints from the public are processed under Section 504, and complaints from 
employees can be processed using the EEO Complaint Process or procedures under 
Section 504.  Links to both procedures are provided below: 

Filing an EEO Complaint:  https://www.dhs.gov/filing-equal-employment-opportunity-
eeo-complaint 

Disability Access in the Department of Homeland Security (Section 504) 
https://www.dhs.gov/disability-access-department-homeland-security. 

All DHS Components maintain an accessibility webpage: 
CBP: 
USCIS: 
HQ: 
OIG: 
FEMA: 
FLETC: 
ICE: 
USCG: 
TSA: 
USSS: 

http://www.cbp.gov/site-policy-notices/accessibility 
https://www.uscis.gov/website-policies/accessibility 
https://www.dhs.gov/accessibility 
https://www.oig.dhs.gov/accessibility 
https://www.fema.gov/accessibility 
https://www.fletc.gov/accessibility-statement 
https://www.ice.gov/site-policies 
http://www.overview.uscg.mil/access/ 
https://www.tsa.gov/accessibility 
https://www.secretservice.gov/section508/ 

2.  Please provide the internet address on the agency's public website for its 
notice explaining employees' and applicants' rights under the Architectural 
Barriers Act, including a description of how to file a complaint. 

DHS currently has the following procedure covering rights under the Architectural 
Barriers Act: 

https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/dhs-instruction-nondiscrimination-
individuals-disabilities_03-07-15.pdf 

Additionally, DHS employs Disability Access Coordinators at each Component to 
coordinate and provide support for compliance with Section 504. 

In FY 2018, CRCL will coordinate DHS efforts with the DHS Office of the Chief 
Readiness Support Officer and Office of Facilities and Operational Support 
(OCRSO/FOS), to develop language required by Section 501, then socialize and 
implement the process throughout the Components. 

The United States Access Board enforces the Architectural Barriers Act (ABA). 
Complainants may file an ABA complaint with the Access Board using an Online ABA 
Complaint Form or by e-mail, fax, or mail (please see the contact information below). 
For more information on how to file an ABA complaint, visit the Access Board’s 
Complaint Form page. 

3.  Describe any programs, policies, or practices that the agency has undertaken, 

or plans on undertaking over the next fiscal year, designed to improve 
accessibility of agency facilities and/or technology. 

DHS issued the policy and procedures for Nondiscrimination for Individuals with 
Disabilities in DHS-Conducted Programs and Activities (Non-Employment).  Directive 

18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Department of Homeland Security 

FY 2017 

Number 065-01 outlines DHS’ policy and Instruction Number 065-01-001 provides 
implementing its instruction. This policy requires all Components to identify Disability 
Access Coordinators and requires each Component to conduct a self-evaluation of 
DHS programs and activities to ensure accessibility. 
As previously stated, CRCL will collaborate with OAST, OCRSO/FOS, and DHS 
Components to implement standardized language to meet the requirements for 
posting notices on the internal and external websites that define the rights of 
individuals with disabilities under Section 508 and the ABA. 

C. REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION PROGRAM 

Pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.203(d)(3), agencies must adopt, post on their public website, and 
make available to all job applicants and employees, reasonable accommodation procedures. 

1.  Please provide the average time frame for processing initial requests for 
reasonable accommodations during the reporting period. (Please do not 
include previously approved requests with repetitive accommodations, such as 
interpreting services.) 

41.7 Days 

During FY 2017, the overall average time frame for processing initial requests for 
reasonable accommodations was approximately 20 days. 
The average number of days reported by DHS Components for FY 2017 are as 
follows: 
CBP: 
USCIS:  17 Days 
HQ: 
21 Days 
FEMA:  2.5 Days 
ICE: 
TSA: 
USCG:  16.41 Days 
USSS:  11.65 Days 

24.37 Days 
35 Days 

2.  Describe the effectiveness of the policies, procedures, or practices to 

implement the agency’s reasonable accommodation program.  Some examples 
of an effective program include timely processing requests, timely providing 
approved accommodations, conducting training for managers and supervisors, 
and monitoring accommodation requests for trends. 

DHS is committed to providing effective reasonable accommodations to employees 
and applicants with disabilities. The overall average processing time for reasonable 
accommodation requests during FY 2017 was eighteen (18) days. 
DHS developed the Employment of People with Disabilities: Roadmap to Success 
training in 2008, updated the materials in 2012, and more recently during FY 2017 to 
include the provision of the final rule implementing Section 501 of the Rehabilitation 
Act of 1973.  All supervisors, hiring officials and human capital professionals are 
required to complete the training within sixty (60) days of appointment and every two 
years after appointment.  All Components use the DHS training module. 

In 2016, CRCL issued DHS Instruction Number 259-01-002, Procedures for 
Conducting a Department-Wide Search for a Reassignment as a Reasonable 
Accommodation of Last Resort.  This Instruction outlines the procedures used to 
conduct a DHS-wide search for a position that will be used in a reassignment that is a 
reasonable accommodation of last resort. During FY 2017, to support the 
implementation of the Instruction, CRCL partnered with OCHCO, then developed and 

19 

 
Department of Homeland Security 

FY 2017 

delivered training to all Component-level Reasonable Accommodation Coordinators 
and human capital points of contact. 

DHS continues to partner with the Department of Defense (DoD), Computer/Electronic 
Accommodation Program (CAP) to provide assistive technology accommodation 
solutions.  During FY 2017, CAP provided 357 accommodations to 148 employees, 
totaling $126,658.90 in cost savings to DHS. 

D. PERSONAL ASSISTANCE SERVICES ALLOWING EMPLOYEES TO 
PARTICIPATE IN THE WORKPLACE 

Pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1614.203(d)(5), federal agencies, as an aspect of affirmative action, 
are required to provide personal assistance services (PAS) to employees who need them 
because of a targeted disability, unless doing so would impose an undue hardship on the 
agency. 

Describe the effectiveness of the policies, procedures, or practices to implement the PAS 
requirement. Some examples of an effective program include timely processing requests, 
timely providing approved services, conducting training for managers and supervisors, and 
monitoring PAS requests for trends. 

In FY 2017, DHS posted an updated notice to CRCL Connect Page, covering the 
requirement to provide personal assistance services (PAS).  The language reads: 
Consistent with the EEOC’s guidance until further notice, requests for Personal 
Assistance Service (PAS) will be processed under reasonable accommodations 
procedures. In addition, a link to the EEOC guidance on providing PAS was also 
added. 

DHS plans to revise existing Reasonable Accommodation procedures during FY 
2018, to include PAS. 

Section VII: EEO Complaint and Findings Data 
A. EEO COMPLAINT DATA INVOLVING HARASSMENT 

1.  During the last fiscal year, did a higher percentage of PWD file a formal EEO 

complaint alleging harassment, as compared to the government-wide average? 

Answer: Yes 

2.  During the last fiscal year, did any complaints alleging harassment based on 

disability status result in a finding of discrimination or a settlement agreement? 

Answer: Yes 

3. 

If the agency had one or more findings of discrimination alleging harassment 
based on disability status during the last fiscal year, please describe the 
corrective measures taken by the agency. 

DHS had two findings alleging harassment based on disability status during FY 2017. 
A summary of the corrective measures taken are as follows: 
Finding # 1: 
1. 
2. 
compensatory 
3. 

Post notice for 120 consecutive days. 
Within 60 days of the date the decision is final, pay $500 in non-pecuniary 

Provide training to the two EEO Specialists who processed the complaint. 

damages. 

20 

 
 
Department of Homeland Security 

FY 2017 

Finding # 2: 

Within 60 days of date of decision, provide at least three hours of training to 

supervisors. 

Within 90 days of date the decision becomes final, consider taking 
coworker and supervisor.  Report who 

1. 
the three named 
2. 
disciplinary action against the 
considered the disciplinary action, what factors were 
was taken. If no action is taken, report the reasons why. 
Entitled to compensatory damages. 
3. 
a. 
On September 9, 2017, a FAD awarded $25,000 in non-pecuniary 
compensatory damages. 
4. 
a. 
5. 

Entitled to attorney’s fees and costs. 
On September 9, 2017, a FAD awarded no attorney’s fees. 
Post notice for 60 days. 

considered, and what action 

B. EEO COMPLAINT DATA INVOLVING REASONABLE 
ACCOMMODATION 

1.  During the last fiscal year, did a higher percentage of PWD file a formal EEO 

complaint alleging failure to provide a reasonable accommodation, as 
compared to the government-wide average? 

Answer: No 

2.  During the last fiscal year, did any complaints alleging failure to provide 

reasonable accommodation result in a finding of discrimination or a settlement 
agreement? 

Answer: Yes 

3. 

If the agency had one or more findings of discrimination involving the failure to 
provide a reasonable accommodation during the last fiscal year, please 
describe the corrective measures taken by the agency. 

DHS had two findings alleging failure to provide a reasonable accommodation based 
on disability status during FY 2017.  A summary of the corrective measures taken are 
as follows: 

Finding # 1: (same as Finding # 1 for Harassment above) 
Post notice for 120 consecutive days. 
1. 
2. 
Within 60 days of the date the decision is final, pay $500 in non-pecuniary 
compensatory 
3. 

Provide training to the two EEO Specialists who processed the complaint. 

damages. 

Finding #2: 
1. 
Specialist with a 
accommodations. 
2. 
3. 
action against the 
action, what factors were 
taken, report the reasons why. 
4. 

Within 60 days of receipt of the decision, provide EEO training for the HR 
focus on the correct procedures and processing of reasonable 

Determine back pay from June 9, 2016 to January 26, 2017. 
Within 90 days of date decision becomes final, consider taking disciplinary 

HR Specialist.  Report who considered the disciplinary 

considered, and what action was taken.  If no action is 

$7,500 in non-pecuniary compensatory damages. 

21 

 
 
 
 
Department of Homeland Security 

FY 2017 

5. 
6. 

$13,195 in attorney’s fees and $317.70 in costs. 
Post notice for 60 days. 

Section VIII: Identification and Removal of Barriers 

Element D of MD-715 requires agencies to conduct a barrier analysis when a trigger suggests 
that a policy, procedure, or practice may be impeding the employment opportunities of a 
protected EEO group. 

1.  Has the agency identified any barriers (policies, procedures, and/or practices) 

that affect employment opportunities for PWD and/or PWTD? 

Answer: Yes 

2.  Has the agency established a plan to correct the barrier(s) involving PWD 

and/or PWTD? 

Answer: Yes 

3. 

Identify each trigger and plan to remove the barrier(s), including the identified 
barrier(s), objective(s), responsible official(s), planned activities, and, where 
applicable, accomplishments. 

Lower than expected participation for individuals with disability (IWD) and targeted 
disabilities (IWTD) when compared to the regulatory goals of 12 percent for IWD 
and 2 percent for IWTD in grade clusters GS 1 – 10 and GS 11 – SES. 

Trigger 1 

Barrier(s) 

Objective(s) 

Increase workforce participation rates of IWD and IWTD at all grade levels. 

Responsible Official(s) 

Performance Standards Address 
the Plan? 
(Yes or No) 

CRCL, OCHCO, OAST 

Yes 

Barrier Analysis Process Completed?
(Yes or No) 

Barrier(s) Identified?
(Yes or No) 

No 

No 

Sources of Data 

Sources 
Reviewed? 
(Yes or No) 

Identify Information Collected 

Workforce Data Tables 

Complaint Data (Trends) 

Grievance Data (Trends) 
Findings from Decisions (e.g., 
EEO, Grievance, MSPB, Anti-
Harassment Processes) 
Climate Assessment Survey (e.g., 
FEVS) 

Exit Interview Data 

Focus Groups 

Yes 

No 

No 

No 

No 

No 

No 

22 

Department of Homeland Security 

FY 2017 

Sources of Data 

Interviews 
Reports (e.g., Congress, EEOC, 
MSPB, GAO, OPM) 

Other (Please Describe) 
Target Date
(mm/dd/yyyy) 

Planned Activities 

Identify Information Collected 

Sources 
Reviewed? 
(Yes or No) 

No 

No 

No 

Sufficient 
Staffing &
Funding
(Yes or No) 

Modified 
Date 
(mm/dd/yyyy) 

Completion
Date 
(mm/dd/yyyy) 

12/30/2017 

09/30/2018 

03/30/2018 

09/30/2018 

09/30/2018 

09/30/2018 

Issue Annual Hiring Goals for IWD 
and IWTD and socialize throughout 
DHS. 
Update DHS Disability training
module for managers and HR 
Professionals (Employment of People 
with Disability: A Roadmap to 
Success Training) 
Develop mid-year reporting
requirements to monitor Component 
progress with implementing the 
revised rule on Section 501 of the 
Rehabilitation Act. 
Collaborate with OCHCO to revise 
DHS standard language on all 
vacancy announcements to 
encourage applicants with disabilities 
to apply, and to clearly explain 
Schedule A process and requesting 
reasonable accommodations. 
Revise Reasonable Accommodation
procedures and include procedures 
for providing Personal Assistance 
Services. 
Develop and post notice of rights for 
employees and applicants under 
Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act 
and the Architectural Barriers Act on 
the internal and external websites. 

03/30/2018 

Implement and post Affirmative 
Action plan for Individuals with 
Disabilities to the DHS website 
internally and externally. 

Yes 

Yes

Yes

Yes 

Yes

Yes 

Yes 

Fiscal Year 

Accomplishments 

Individuals with disabilities and targeted disabilities are receiving recognition and 
awards at rates lower than expected when compared to individuals without 
disabilities. 

Trigger 2 

Barrier(s) 

Objective(s)  Collaborate with OCHCO to review recognition and awards policy, practices and 

procedures, and determine next steps. 

23 

 
Department of Homeland Security 

FY 2017 

Responsible Official(s) 

CRCL, OCHCO 

Performance Standards Address 
the Plan? 
(Yes or No) 

Yes 

Barrier Analysis Process Completed?
(Yes or No) 

Barrier(s) Identified?
(Yes or No) 

No 

No 

Sources of Data 

Sources 
Reviewed? 
(Yes or No) 

Identify Information Collected 

Workforce Data Tables 

Complaint Data (Trends) 

Grievance Data (Trends) 
Findings from Decisions (e.g., 
EEO, Grievance, MSPB, Anti-
Harassment Processes) 
Climate Assessment Survey (e.g., 
FEVS) 

Exit Interview Data 

Focus Groups 

Interviews 
Reports (e.g., Congress, EEOC, 
MSPB, GAO, OPM) 

Yes 

No 

No 

No 

No 

No 

No 

No 

No 

No 

Other (Please Describe) 
Target Date
(mm/dd/yyyy) 

Planned Activities 

09/30/2018 

Collaborate with OCHCO to review 
recognition and awards policy, 
practices and procedures, and 
determine next steps. 

Modified 
Date 
(mm/dd/yyyy) 

Completion
Date 
(mm/dd/yyyy) 

Sufficient 
Staffing &
Funding
(Yes or No) 

Yes 

Fiscal Year 

Accomplishments 

Trigger 3 

Barrier(s) 

Objective(s) 

Unavailability of applicant flow data by disability distribution to effectively analyze 
percentage of qualified applicants for career development opportunities, promotions 
and new hires. Limited access to Applicant Flow data using current systems (USA 
Staffing/Cognos, Monster Government Solutions, and Learning Management 
Systems). 

Acquire accurate and reliable applicant flow data to analyze, monitor and inform 
program enhancements to increase representation of IWD and IWTD in all 
programs and hires. 

24 

Department of Homeland Security 

FY 2017 

Responsible Official(s) 

Performance Standards Address 
the Plan? 
(Yes or No) 

CRCL, OCHCO, SRDI, OCHCO Reports and 
Analysis 

Yes 

Barrier Analysis Process Completed?
(Yes or No) 

Barrier(s) Identified?
(Yes or No) 

No 

No 

Sources of Data 

Sources 
Reviewed? 
(Yes or No) 

Identify Information Collected 

Workforce Data Tables 

Complaint Data (Trends) 

Grievance Data (Trends) 
Findings from Decisions (e.g., 
EEO, Grievance, MSPB, Anti-
Harassment Processes) 
Climate Assessment Survey (e.g., 
FEVS) 

Exit Interview Data 

Focus Groups 

Interviews 
Reports (e.g., Congress, EEOC, 
MSPB, GAO, OPM) 

No 

No 

No 

No 

No 

No 

No 

No 

No 

No 

Other (Please Describe) 
Target Date
(mm/dd/yyyy) 

Planned Activities 

Sufficient 
Staffing &
Funding
(Yes or No) 

Modified 
Date 
(mm/dd/yyyy) 

Completion
Date 
(mm/dd/yyyy) 

09/30/2020 

09/30/2019 

CRCL and OCHCO will work with
OPM and Monster Government 
Solutions to modify data collection 
and reporting capabilities to match 
MD-715 data reporting requirements. 
Coordinate with OCHCO to develop 
AFD framework for the SES Career 
Development Program, Pathways 
Program, and mentoring programs at 
the DHS level. 

Yes

Yes 

Fiscal Year 

Accomplishments 

Trigger 4 

Barrier(s) 

Lower than expected conversion rates of eligible Schedule A employees into 
competitive service. 

Objective(s) 

Increase conversion rates of eligible Schedule A employees. 

25 

Department of Homeland Security 

FY 2017 

Responsible Official(s) 

CRCL, OCHCO 

Performance Standards Address 
the Plan? 
(Yes or No) 

Yes 

Barrier Analysis Process Completed?
(Yes or No) 

Barrier(s) Identified?
(Yes or No) 

No 

No 

Sources of Data 

Sources 
Reviewed? 
(Yes or No) 

Identify Information Collected 

Workforce Data Tables 

Complaint Data (Trends) 

Grievance Data (Trends) 
Findings from Decisions (e.g., 
EEO, Grievance, MSPB, Anti-
Harassment Processes) 
Climate Assessment Survey (e.g., 
FEVS) 

Exit Interview Data 

Focus Groups 

Interviews 
Reports (e.g., Congress, EEOC, 
MSPB, GAO, OPM) 

Yes 

No 

No 

No 

No 

No 

No 

No 

No 

No 

Other (Please Describe) 
Target Date
(mm/dd/yyyy) 

Planned Activities 

Sufficient 
Staffing &
Funding
(Yes or No) 

Modified 
Date 
(mm/dd/yyyy) 

Completion
Date 
(mm/dd/yyyy) 

09/30/2018 

01/30/2018 

09/30/2018 

Review and analyze current policies 
and procedures for excepted service 
appointments. 
Monitoring Schedule A Conversions 
on a quarterly basis. 
Coordinate efforts with OCHCO to 
develop DHS Schedule A policy and 
procedures. 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Fiscal Year 

Accomplishments 

Trigger 5 

Barrier(s) 

Higher than expected separation rates for individuals with disabilities. 

Objective(s) 

Increase retention rates of individuals with disabilities and targeted disabilities. 

Responsible Official(s) 

Performance Standards Address 
the Plan? 
(Yes or No) 

26 

Department of Homeland Security 

FY 2017 

Responsible Official(s) 

CRCL, OCHCO 

Performance Standards Address 
the Plan? 
(Yes or No) 

Yes 

Barrier Analysis Process Completed?
(Yes or No) 

Barrier(s) Identified?
(Yes or No) 

No 

No 

Sources of Data 

Sources 
Reviewed? 
(Yes or No) 

Identify Information Collected 

Workforce Data Tables 

Complaint Data (Trends) 

Grievance Data (Trends) 
Findings from Decisions (e.g., 
EEO, Grievance, MSPB, Anti-
Harassment Processes) 
Climate Assessment Survey (e.g., 
FEVS) 

Exit Interview Data 

Focus Groups 

Interviews 
Reports (e.g., Congress, EEOC, 
MSPB, GAO, OPM) 

Yes 

No 

No 

No 

No 

No 

No 

No 

No 

No 

Other (Please Describe) 
Target Date
(mm/dd/yyyy) 

Planned Activities 

Sufficient 
Staffing &
Funding
(Yes or No) 

Modified 
Date 
(mm/dd/yyyy) 

Completion
Date 
(mm/dd/yyyy) 

01/30/2018 

01/30/2018 

06/30/2018 

Review and analyze exit surveys to 
identify barriers to retention. 
Monitor separations on a quarterly 
basis by disability distribution. 
Collaborate with OCHCO to explore 
feasibility of implementing new 
retention programs specifically for 
IWD and IWTD. 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Fiscal Year 

Accomplishments 

27 

Department of Homeland Security 

FY 2017 

4.  Please explain the factor(s) that prevented the agency from timely completing 

any of the planned activities. 

Activities are new for FY17. 

5.  For the planned activities that were completed, please describe the actual 

impact of those activities toward eliminating the barrier(s). 

Activites are new for FY17. 

6. 

If the planned activities did not correct the trigger(s) and/or barrier(s), please 
describe how the agency intends to improve the plan for the next fiscal year. 

Activities are new for FY17. 

28 

FEMA MANUAL 252-11-1  
CADRE OF ON-CALL RESPONSE/RECOVERY EMPLOYEE (CORE) 
PROGRAM 
APPROVAL DATE: 08/25/2015 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 

FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY 

OFFICE OF THE CHIEF COMPONENT HUMAN CAPITAL OFFICER 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Foreword 

The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) intends to achieve business and 
management excellence by providing guidance and policy direction for the 
administration of FEMA’s Cadre of On-call Response/Recovery Employees (COREs). 
FEMA’s most valuable resource is its workforce; permanent and temporary employees 
who are focused on and committed to leading America to prepare for, prevent, respond 
to, and recover from all-hazards incidents. FEMA relies upon its temporary personnel, in 
particular, to carry out its role in incident management and support operations and to 
augment FEMA’s permanent workforce.   

The objective of the CORE Program is to attract and maintain a pool of highly skilled 
and motivated temporary personnel who are well trained and ready to respond and 
deliver quality and timely services to survivors and communities impacted by all-hazards 
incidents. The publication of this Manual will ensure consistent policy application and 
enable FEMA to better manage COREs in a cost effective and efficient manner, while 
offering the necessary incentives to recruit a professional incident workforce capable of 
assisting disaster survivors in their time of greatest need. 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 

Foreword ......................................................................................................................... 2 

CHAPTER 1: GENERAL INFORMATION ...................................................................... 7 

1-1.  Purpose ................................................................................................................ 7 

1-2.  Applicability and Scope ........................................................................................ 7 

1-3.  Authorities............................................................................................................. 7 

1-4.  References ........................................................................................................... 7 

1-5.  Policy .................................................................................................................... 9 

1-6.  Definitions ........................................................................................................... 10 

1-7.  Responsibilities ................................................................................................... 15 

1-8.  Reporting Requirement ...................................................................................... 24 

1-9.  Forms Prescribed ............................................................................................... 24 

1-10.  No Private Right ................................................................................................. 24 

1-11.  Questions ........................................................................................................... 24 

CHAPTER 2: RECRUITMENT AND HIRING ............................................................... 25 

2-1.  General ............................................................................................................... 25 

2-2.  Staffing Plans ..................................................................................................... 25 

2-3.  Annual Direct Charge CORE Certification .......................................................... 26 

2-4.  Procedures for Soliciting Candidates .................................................................. 27 

2-5.  Name Request .................................................................................................... 30 

2-6. 

Interviews ........................................................................................................... 30 

2-7.  Reference Checks .............................................................................................. 31 

2-8. 

Job Offers ........................................................................................................... 31 

2-9.  Notification to Applicants .................................................................................... 32 

2-10.  Recordkeeping Requirements ............................................................................ 32 

CHAPTER 3: APPOINTMENTS ................................................................................... 33 

3-1.  Eligibility for Appointment ................................................................................... 33 

3-2.  CORE Appointments .......................................................................................... 33 

3-3.  Conditions of Employment .................................................................................. 34 

3-4.  Directed Work Location ...................................................................................... 35 

3-5.  Oath of Office ..................................................................................................... 35 

3-6.  Government Property ......................................................................................... 35 

3 

 
 
3-7.  Reassignments to a New Position ...................................................................... 36 

3-8.  Detail Assignments ............................................................................................. 36 

3-9.  Reappointment Procedures ................................................................................ 37 

3-10.  Resignation......................................................................................................... 37 

CHAPTER 4: COMPENSATION PROVISIONS ........................................................... 38 

4-1.  Applicability......................................................................................................... 38 

4-2.  Establishment of CORE Pay Plan ...................................................................... 38 

4-3.  Conversion Actions ............................................................................................. 38 

4-4.  Position Management and Classification ............................................................ 38 

4-5.  Locality Pay ........................................................................................................ 38 

4-6.  Cost of Living Increase ....................................................................................... 39 

4-7.  Pay Ceilings and Premium Pay .......................................................................... 39 

4-8.  Recruitment, Relocation, or Retention Incentives ............................................... 39 

4-9.  Offset Provision for Civilian Retirees .................................................................. 41 

CHAPTER 5: COMPENSATION (PAY BANDS) .......................................................... 42 

5-1.  General ............................................................................................................... 42 

5-2.  Setting Basic Rate of Pay ................................................................................... 42 

5-3.  Pay Adjustments ................................................................................................. 43 

5-4.  Merit-Based Increase ......................................................................................... 43 

5-5.  Promotion ........................................................................................................... 44 

5-6.  Change to a Lower Pay Band ............................................................................. 44 

CHAPTER 6: COMPENSATION (GRADES AND STEPS) .......................................... 46 

6-1.  General ............................................................................................................... 46 

6-2.  Setting Basic Rate of Pay ................................................................................... 46 

6-3.  Pay Adjustments ................................................................................................. 47 

6-4.  Step Increases .................................................................................................... 48 

6-5.  Promotion ........................................................................................................... 49 

6-6.  Change to Lower Grade ..................................................................................... 49 

CHAPTER 7: BENEFITS .............................................................................................. 51 

7-1.  General ............................................................................................................... 51 

7-2.  Health Benefits ................................................................................................... 51 

7-3.  FEDVIP (Dental and Vision) Program ................................................................ 52 

7-4.  Life Insurance ..................................................................................................... 52 

4 

 
7-5.  Retirement .......................................................................................................... 52 

7-6.  Thrift Savings Plan ............................................................................................. 53 

7-7.  Federal Long-Term Care Insurance Program ..................................................... 53 

7-8.  Flexible Spending Accounts ............................................................................... 53 

7-9.  Employee Assistance Program (EAP) ................................................................ 53 

7-10.  Transit Subsidy Program .................................................................................... 53 

CHAPTER 8: PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT ......................................................... 55 

8-1.  General ............................................................................................................... 55 

8-2.  Performance Management for CORE-Is ............................................................. 55 

8-3.  Deployment Performance Management ............................................................. 55 

CHAPTER 9: AWARDS AND RECOGNITION ............................................................. 57 

9-1.  Awards and Recognition Program ...................................................................... 57 

CHAPTER 10: SCHEDULING OF WORK AND TELEWORK ...................................... 58 

10-1.  Scheduling of Work and Telework ...................................................................... 58 

CHAPTER 11: PROCEDURES FOR MISCONDUCT AND POOR PERFORMANCE .. 59 

11-1.  General ............................................................................................................... 59 

11-2.  Addressing Misconduct ...................................................................................... 59 

11-3.  Addressing Poor Performance ............................................................................ 62 

11-4.  Deployment Scenarios ....................................................................................... 64 

11-5.  Arrest, Indictment, and other Allegations of Misconduct ..................................... 64 

11-6.  The Appeal Process ........................................................................................... 66 

11-7.  Allegations of Discrimination............................................................................... 66 

11-8.  Allegations of Fraud, Waste, Abuse, and Mismanagement ................................ 66 

CHAPTER 12: RIGHTSIZING ....................................................................................... 67 

12-1.  General ............................................................................................................... 67 

12-2.  Rightsizing Plan .................................................................................................. 67 

12-3.  Notice ................................................................................................................. 68 

12-4.  Retention Criteria ................................................................................................ 68 

12-5.  Transitional Options for Released COREs ......................................................... 70 

CHAPTER 13: ABSENCE AND LEAVE ....................................................................... 71 

13-1.  Absence and Leave Policy ................................................................................. 71 

CHAPTER 14: TRAINING AND ETHICS ...................................................................... 72 

14-1.  Training Provisions ............................................................................................. 72 

5 

 
14-2.  Ethics Requirements .......................................................................................... 72 

CHAPTER 15: CONTINUING SERVICE AGREEMENTS ............................................ 74 

15-1.  Service Agreement ............................................................................................. 74 

15-2.  Terminations of a CSA ....................................................................................... 74 

15-3.  Debt Recovery .................................................................................................... 74 

6 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1:  GENERAL INFORMATION 

1-1.  Purpose 

This Manual establishes the policies and procedures for FEMA’s Cadre of On-
call Response/Recovery Employees (CORE) Program. FEMA will achieve 
consistency and facilitate the equitable and effective management of all COREs 
through the implementation of the policies and procedures set forth in this 
Manual. 

1-2.  Applicability and Scope 

A.  The provisions of this Manual apply to all FEMA COREs, unless otherwise 

indicated. 

B.  FD 010-7, Incident Management Assistance Team (IMAT) Program Directive 
(IMAT Directive), is applicable to COREs who receive CORE-I appointments, 
also known as CORE-Incident Management Assistance Team (IMAT) 
Members or Pilot IMATs. Inconsistencies between this Manual and the IMAT 
Directive are resolved in favor of the IMAT Directive. 

C.  The Attorney Hiring and Promotion Plan (AHPP), dated April 21, 2014, 
provides pay setting, pay adjustments, and promotion policy for CORE 
Attorneys. Inconsistencies between this Manual and the AHPP are resolved 
in favor of the AHPP. 

1-3.  Authorities 

Section 306 of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance 
Act, Pub. L. No. 93-288, as amended (Stafford Act), codified at 42 U.S.C. §§ 
5121 et seq., provides FEMA with authority “to appoint and fix the compensation 
of such temporary personnel as may be necessary, without regard to the 
provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the 
competitive service.”  

1-4.  References 

The following list is not an exhaustive list of statutes, regulations, DHS and 
FEMA directives and manuals, policies, and guidance memorandums applicable 
to COREs. 

A.  FEMA Policy 401-123-1, Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) Policy 

Statement, October 1, 2014.  

B.  Memorandum from the DHS Chief Human Capital Officer, Annual Leave 

Enhancements, February 17, 2006. 

C.  DHS Instruction 121-01-007, DHS Personnel Suitability and Security 

Program, June 2009. 

D.  DHS Management Directive 254-02, Employee Assistance Program, May 31, 

2007. 

7 

 
 
 
 
E.  DHS Management Directive 0810.1, The Office of Inspector General, June 

10, 2004. 

F.  DHS Management Directive 3120.2, Employment of Non-Citizens, March 22, 

2004. 

G.  Memorandum from the Deputy Administrator, Every Employee an Emergency 

Manager—Action Items, January 20, 2012.  

H.  FEMA Directive (FD) 010-7, Incident Management Assistance Team (IMAT) 

Program Directive, January 12, 2015. 

I.  FEMA Directive 010-9, FEMA Incident Workforce Cadre Management, June 

9, 2015. 

J.  FEMA Directive 122-1, International Travel, October 24, 2011. 

K.  FEMA Directive 122-2, Local Travel Reimbursement, March 12, 2013. 

L.  FEMA Directive 122-4, Payment of Official Travel Expenses from a Non-

Federal Source, June 27, 2013. 

M.  FEMA Directive 122-7, Premium Class Travel, September 19, 2013. 

N.  FEMA Directive 122-8, Invitational Travel, February 7, 2014. 

O.  FEMA Directive 122-9, Travel Charge Card, April 18, 2014. 

P.  FEMA Directive 119-6, Employee Physical Fitness Program, February 2, 

2012. 

Q.  FEMA Directive 141-1, Records Management Program Directive, March 6, 

2014. 

R.  FEMA Manual (FM) 106-1-1, Scheduling of Work, March 5, 2014. 

S.  FEMA Manual 123-9-1, Telework, January 9, 2013. 

T.  FEMA Manual 123-20-1, Drug-Free Workplace Program, July 28, 2014. 

U.  FEMA Manual 253-2-1, Premium Pay, February 11, 2014. 

V.  FEMA Manual 255-1-1, FEMA Employee Performance Management Program 

(EPMP), February 21, 2013. 

W. FEMA Manual 255-4-1, Employee Awards and Recognition, September 26, 

2013. 

X.  FEMA Manual 109-2-1, Privacy Program, June 4, 2013. 

Y.  FEMA Manual 3300.3, FEMA Absence and Leave Policy, July 31, 2001. 

Z.  FEMA Manual 6200.1, Travel Regulations, November 25, 1988. 

AA. Memorandum from the FEMA Chief Counsel, Appointment and 

Compensation of Stafford Act Employees Under Section 306(b)(1) of the 
Stafford Act, June 25, 2012. 

BB. Attorney Hiring and Promotion Plan, April 21, 2014. 

8 

 
CC.FEMA Interview and Selection Guidance, June 4, 2014. 

DD.FEMA Budget Guidance on use of DRF/DRS resources, March 2015. 

1-5.  Policy 

A.  The authority provided by the Stafford Act allows FEMA to manage its CORE 
Program without being required to apply all of the provisions of Title 5, United 
States Code, and its implementing regulations. FEMA chooses, as a matter of 
policy, to administratively implement some Title 5 provisions and, in other 
circumstances, to use its Stafford Act authority to create and administer its 
own policies to more effectively manage Stafford Act employees consistent 
with the intent and program needs for these positions. In all circumstances, 
FEMA intends to develop and implement policies that are fair and equitable to 
its CORE workforce and that are consistently understood and implemented by 
FEMA managers and supervisors. 

B.  COREs are hired to directly support the response and recovery efforts related 

to disasters and are funded out of the Disaster Relief Fund (DRF). As 
temporary employees, COREs cannot replace the work performed and 
funded through annual appropriations by permanent full-time staff. COREs 
can perform Stafford Act duties that are not otherwise funded in FEMA’s 
budget and can be charged to an open disaster. The use of COREs must be 
reviewed and validated on a recurring basis to ensure a continued need for 
the positions and consistent funding decisions across FEMA. 

C.  FEMA shall: 

1.  Staff positions with the best qualified persons available; 

2.  Develop and use COREs to the maximum extent possible consistent with 

the completion of FEMA’s mission and the Stafford Act; 

3.  Establish CORE positions with a minimum of two-year appointments 
(unless otherwise justified for less than two years based on workload 
analyses) based on requests from Offices and Directorates authorized to 
fill CORE positions. Offices and Directorates will request the renewal of a 
CORE’s appointment prior to the CORE’s expiration date, subject to 
funding (see section 3-9); 

4.  Require COREs to sign a Conditions of Employment letter at the time of 

hiring and reappointment; 

5.  Ensure that all personnel actions are taken without regard to political, 

religious, or labor organization affiliation or non-affiliation, marital or family 
status, race, color, gender, sexual orientation, national origin, disability, 
genetic information, age, or prior Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) 
activity; without regard to criteria unrelated to the position, such as 
personal friendship or patronage, and that selections are based solely on 
job-related criteria; and do not fall within prohibited personnel practices 
identified at 5 U.S.C. § 2302(b);  

9 

 
 
6.  Establish a pay system that will improve the ability of FEMA to attract and 

retain quality candidates and employees; 

7.  Ensure that equal pay is provided for work of equal value, with appropriate 
consideration of both national and local pay rates paid by employers in the 
private sector, and that appropriate incentives and recognition should be 
provided for excellence in performance; and 

8.  Provide effective education and training, consistent with Stafford Act 
duties, which will result in enhanced organizational and individual 
performance. 

D.  COREs must: 

1.  Maintain high standards of integrity, conduct, and concern for the public 

interest; and 

2.  Be prepared at all times to deploy or work from alternate work locations 

other than their normal official duty station. 

E.  COREs may be terminated at any time, with cause (poor performance or 

misconduct), or without cause (such as when workload or funding diminishes 
or ends). 

F.  A CORE may be subject to removal if the CORE declines a deployment 

request without reasonable cause. 

1-6.  Definitions 

A.  Algorithm. A formula for allocating a CORE’s salary and benefits across 

multiple disaster declarations. The allocation should correlate to the estimated 
amount of time the CORE performs work attributable to each declaration. 

B.  Annual Direct Charge CORE Certification. The annual process for verification 
of Disaster Relief Fund (DRF) related duties and the continued need for all 
CORE positions.   

C.  Appointment. A personnel action that results in an individual becoming a 
FEMA employee. Individuals, who accept CORE positions, are given 
excepted service appointments with FEMA under the Stafford Act. Generally, 
appointments may not be effective prior to the date of approval by the 
appointing official and are only effective from the date of acceptance of the 
offer of employment and entrance on duty, unless a later date is stated on the 
SF-52, or other approving document. 

D.  Ancillary Support. Personnel directly supporting disaster operations from their 

daily duty station. 

E.  Backfill. Hiring an employee to fill a previously approved vacant funded 

position. 

F.  Basic pay. The rate of pay fixed by administrative action for the position held 
before any deductions, but exclusive of additional pay of any other kind, 
including premium pay. 

10 

 
 
G.  Career path. A progression of positions in one or more occupational series 

leading to an increase in responsibility and proficiency. 

H.  Confidential Financial Disclosure (OGE Form 450) Filer. A CORE who, 

because of the duties of his or her assigned position, must file confidential 
financial disclosure reports (OGE Form 450s) as directed by the Office of 
Government Ethics and FEMA’s Office of the Chief Counsel pursuant to 5 
C.F.R. § 2634 Subpart I. COREs in these positions are assigned FEMA 
duties that involve the exercise of significant discretion in certain sensitive 
areas. OGE Form 450 disclosures serve to ensure confidence in the integrity 
of FEMA operations by identifying and preventing potential conflicts of 
interest. If a CORE’s position description indicates duties requiring a 
confidential financial disclosure, timely filing of OGE Form 450 is a condition 
of employment. 

I.  Continuing Service Agreement (CSA). A written agreement between FEMA 

and a CORE under which the CORE agrees to a specified period of 
employment with FEMA in return for a monetary incentive or participation in a 
training or developmental program. 

J.  Conversion Action. The process by which a non-CORE FEMA employee is 

appointed to a CORE position.  

K.  CORE-I (IMAT CORE). A CORE assigned full-time to an IMAT and to an 

IMAT position description. CORE-Is receive four-year appointments and are 
the first FEMA personnel deployed to an incident, serving in leadership roles 
as part of an IMAT. When not deployed, IMAT CORE base salaries are paid 
from the Disaster Readiness and Support (DRS) account; however, when 
deployed their salaries are paid by the disaster (under the declaration). IMAT 
COREs are non-direct charge COREs and new, backfill, or reassignment 
actions are not subject to direct charge CORE requirements. 

L.  Declaration. Declarations for DRF-funded events, including major disasters, 

emergencies, fire management declarations, and disasters under the 
Compact of Free Association. 

M.  Demotion. A change to a lower grade or pay band and a decrease in pay as a 

result of an adverse action or poor performance.  

N.  Direct Charge CORE. Employees whose primary duty is to carry out Stafford 

Act functions in support of open, active declarations or pre-event surge 
activities to an event for which a declaration is reasonably likely and 
imminent. The salary of a Direct Charge CORE is charged to Major Disasters, 
Emergencies, Fire Management Assistance Grants or the Disaster Surge 
account. Direct Charge COREs working on specific events should charge 
their time directly to those events. Direct Charge COREs working on multiple 
events or working as a part of a distributed group defined below should 
charge their time to an algorithm that accurately reflects the amount of work 
performed for each of those events. Specifically, the salary of a Direct Charge 
CORE may be structured in one of the following ways: 

11 

 
1.  Specific Declaration: Salary is based on work performed on a single, 

specific declaration.  

2.  Multiple Declarations: Salary is based on work that provides services to 
multiple declarations and is charged based on an established algorithm.  

3.  Distributed Group Activities: Activities comprised of non-segregable 

declaration and non-declaration related functions that will be performed 
collectively by COREs and non-COREs. The number of COREs carrying 
out a particular Distributed Group Activity is based on the percentage of 
time required for the disaster related functions of that Distributed Group 
Activity. Charges are allocated across multiple disasters based on an 
established algorithm for the Distributed Group Activity.1  

Duties related to preparedness, readiness, and planning for future events are 
not allowable Direct Charge CORE duties. Charging a CORE’s salary to 
declarations when the duties performed by the CORE do not support those 
declarations could result in a violation of the Anti-Deficiency Act (ADA) and 
result in adverse actions against the responsible officials. 

O.  Distributed Group Activity Baseline. The ratio of COREs and non-COREs 
carrying out a particular Distributed Group Activity as determined by the 
percentage declaration and non-declaration functions performed for that 
Activity based on verifiable workload data and evaluation of current or past 
budget justification materials. 

P.  FEMA Qualification System (FQS). A performance-based system for 

certifying FEMA employees as “Qualified” or “Trainee” in IM and IS positions; 
certification is based on successful completion of required experience, 
required training, and demonstrated performance (see FEMA Directive 010-9, 
Incident Workforce Cadre Management, dated June 9, 2014). 

Q.  Fitness Determination. “Fitness” means “the level of character and conduct 
determined for an individual to perform work for or on behalf of a Federal 
agency as an employee in the excepted service (other than a position subject 
to suitability) or as a contractor employee.” Executive Order 13,488, § 2(d); 
implemented in DHS Instruction 121-01-007, Chapter 3. 

R.  IM CORE. A CORE assigned to a two-year appointment and whose primary 
job duty is to perform an FQS incident management position. When not 
deployed, IM CORE base salaries are paid from the Disaster Readiness and 
Support (DRS) account; however, when deployed their salaries are paid by 
the disaster (under the declaration). IM COREs are non-direct charge COREs 

1 For example, OCFO’s FEMA Finance Center has a Distributed Group Activity that processes and pays invoices 
related to both disaster and non-disaster activities. Determining the number of CORE positions that should populate 
this Distributed Group Activity requires an analysis of the ratio of disaster functions versus non-disaster functions. If 
the analysis concludes that 70% of the functions are disaster related and the entire Distributed Group Activity 
requires 10 positions, then the analysis would justify 7 CORE positions out of the 10 needed to perform those 
functions. 

12 

 
                                                           
and new, backfill, or reassignment actions are not subject to direct charge 
CORE requirements 

S.  Incident Management (IM). The incident-level operation of the Federal role in 
emergency response, recovery, logistics, and mitigation. Responsibilities 
include the direct control and employment of resources, management of 
incident offices, operations, and delivery of Federal assistance through all 
phases of response and recovery. 

T.  Incident Support (IS). The coordination of all Federal resources that support 
emergency response, recovery, logistics, and mitigation. Responsibilities 
include the deployment of national-level assets, support of national objectives 
and programs affected during the disaster, and support of incident operations 
with resources, expertise, information, and guidance. 

U.  Locality Payment. A locality-based comparability payment (see 5 U.S.C. § 

5304 and 5 C.F.R. Part 531, subpart F). 

V.  Mission Essential. Personnel who perform a limited set of FEMA functions 
that must be continued throughout, or resumed rapidly after, a disruption of 
normal activities. 

W. Non-Direct Charge CORE. COREs whose salaries are partially or wholly 
funded by the DRS account within the DRF. These employees’ functions 
support operational readiness, response, and recovery functions of the 
Stafford Act that are not directly attributable to the response and recovery 
efforts of any specific declaration or pre-event surge activities to an event for 
which a declaration is reasonably likely and imminent. Examples of Non-
Direct Charge COREs include IM and IMAT COREs when not deployed or 
working for an open disaster.  

X.  Offices and Directorates. Office of the Administrator, Office of Chief Counsel, 
Office of the Chief Financial Officer, Office of External Affairs, Office of Policy 
and Program Analysis, Office of Response and Recovery, Response 
Directorate, Recovery Directorate, Logistics Management Directorate, 
Protection and National Preparedness, National Preparedness Directorate, 
National Continuity Programs Directorate, Grant Programs Directorate, 
Mission Support, Office of the Chief Administrative Officer, Office of the Chief 
Component Human Capital Officer, Office of the Chief Information Officer, 
Office of the Chief Procurement Officer, Office of the Chief Security Officer, 
Federal Insurance and Mitigation Administration, FIA Mitigation, FIA 
Insurance, United States Fire Administration, and Offices of Regional 
Administrators. 

Y.  Pay Adjustment. Any increase or decrease in a CORE’s basic pay when there 
is no change in the duties or responsibilities of the CORE’s position within the 
same career path and pay plan (see sections 5-3 and 6-3). 

Z.  Pay Band. A range of pay for a group or categories of employees that FEMA 

established according to FEMA’s Stafford Act authority. 

13 

 
AA. Permanent Full-Time (PFT). A permanent FEMA employees who meets the 

definition of “employee” under 5 U.S.C. § 2105. 

BB. Post-Action Review. An internal control established to ensure compliance 

with the Annual Direct Charge CORE Certification review and documentation 
requirements established for Direct Charge CORE positions.   

CC.Program Area. A discrete subdivision within an Office, Division, Branch, or 

Unit that performs work that is substantially different from the work performed 
by other subdivisions. 

DD.Promotion. A personnel action that moves a CORE (1) to a higher grade; (2) 
from one pay band to a higher pay band in the same career path; or (3) to a 
position in another career path in combination with an increase in the CORE’s 
basic pay. 

EE. Qualifying Life Event (QLE). OPM designated events deemed acceptable to 
the IRS that may allow premium conversion participants to change their 
participation election for premium conversion outside of an open season. For 
more information, see OPM’s Healthcare Reference Materials for a listing of 
the authorized Qualifying Life Events. 

FF.Reassignment. A personnel action that moves a CORE from one position to 
another without promotion or change to a lower pay band, grade, or step, at 
management discretion and based on necessary approvals. Reassignment 
includes: (1) movement to a position in a new occupational series, or to 
another position in the same series; (2) assignment to a position that has 
been reclassified due to the introduction of a new or revised classification or 
job grading standard; (3) assignment to a position that has been reclassified 
as a result of a position review; and (4) movement to a different position at the 
same band but with a change in salary that is the result of a different locality 
payment. 

GG. Relative. A father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, first 

cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife, unmarried domestic partner, father-in-
law, mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, 
stepfather, stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half-
brother, or half-sister. The definition of “relative” for sick leave, Family Medical 
Leave Act (FMLA), and other leave purposes may be different; for more 
information see FEMA Manual 3300.3, Absence and Leave. 

HH.Rightsizing. The process by which FEMA reduces CORE staff levels in 

response to changed conditions such as a diminished workload, or budgetary 
or statutory changes. 

II.  Selecting Official. A FEMA employee who is authorized to make a hiring 

decision. 

JJ. Specialized Experience Statement. A written description of any specialized 

experience that a candidate must possess in order to be considered minimally 
qualified for the vacancy. Any candidate who does not meet the specialized 

14 

 
experience requirements will not be referred to Office or Directorate by 
OCCHCO.  

KK. Supervisor. An employee who accomplishes work through the direction of 
other people. A supervisor must spend at least 25 percent of their time 
exercising independent judgment over other employees on matters relating 
to, but not limited to, work assignments, performance management, 
administration, training, and property accountability. 

LL. Supervisor of Record. The supervisor of record has the delegated authority to 
assign work, discipline, and remove a CORE from federal employment in 
accordance with the procedures found in Chapter 11 (discipline) and Chapter 
8 (performance management).  

MM. Temporary Duty Supervisor. The individual (PFT, CORE, or Reservist) on-
site or in virtual communication with deployed PFTs, COREs, or Reservists 
and authorized to exercise independent judgment to assign work. The 
temporary duty supervisor is not authorized to take personnel actions against 
a CORE under his or her functional authority, unless the temporary supervisor 
is also the supervisor of record. 

1-7.  Responsibilities 

A.  FEMA Administrator or Deputy Administrator is responsible for: 

1.  Approving details of COREs to perform non-Stafford Act activities; and 

2.  Approving written recommendations for pay of recruitment, relocation, and 
retention incentives that are greater than 25% of a CORE’s base pay and, 
if approved, forwarding concurrence to the head of the requesting Office 
or Directorate and to OCCHCO. 

B.  Associate Administrators, Headquarters’ Office Chiefs Reporting Directly to 

the Administrator, and Regional Administrators are responsible for: 

1.  Reviewing and approving the creation or renewal of Direct Charge CORE 
positions, confirming funding, and forwarding to OCCHCO for requisite 
personnel processing actions; 

2.  Conducting an annual certification of Direct Charge CORE positions 

approved by authorized officials based on required supporting 
documentation and any follow-up, including referrals to the Office of Chief 
Counsel (OCC) or appropriate offices for further action (see section 2-3); 

3.  Ensuring that all personnel involved in the hiring of COREs are familiar 
with the appropriate legal use of CORE positions, the funding factors 
involved in the hiring process, and comply with all legal and budgetary 
requirements; 

4.  Ensuring all baselines are established and validated on a recurring basis 

for Distributed Group Activity Direct Charge COREs and all new baselines 
or baseline changes are approved by OCFO; 

15 

 
 
5.  Certifying that all Direct Charge COREs are carrying out only DRF-related 

duties performed on open, active disasters; 

6.  Providing timely, supporting documentation to OCFO and any oversight 

organization to complete post-action reviews (see section 2-3); 

7.  Reviewing requests for recruitment, relocation, or retention incentives that 
require approval by the Administrator and, if in concurrence, sending the 
request to OCCHCO, OCFO, and the Administrator for approval; and 

8.  Reviewing requests for recruitment, relocation, or retention incentive 

repayment waivers and, if in concurrence, transmitting to OCCHCO for 
review.  

C.  Assistant Administrators, Deputy Associate Administrators, and Office 

Directors Not Reporting Directly to the Administrator are responsible for: 

1.  Requesting to advance a CORE’s initial rate of pay to step five or greater 

of the grade; 

2.  Reviewing requests for recruitment, relocation, or retention incentive 

repayment waivers that do not require approval by the Administrator and, 
if in concurrence, transmitting to OCCHCO and OCFO for review and 
approval; and 

3.  Ensuring all CORE hiring actions submitted for higher level approval meet 

the standards promulgated herein. 

D.  Headquarters Office or Directorate Chiefs or Regional Administrators are 

responsible for: 

1.  Approving the reassignment of a CORE based on workload needs and 

subject to funding; 

2.  Conducting workload analyses to justify the need for new or continued use 

of CORE positions; 

3.  Submitting staffing plans to OCCHCO with the requested number of 

CORE positions by title, series, grade, and duty station for OCCHCO’s 
approval which should also support Disaster Spend Plans required by 
OCFO; 

4.  Coordinating with OCCHCO to announce and hire CORE positions; 

5.  Renewing CORE appointments based on workload needs and subject to 

funding; 

6.  Approving recruitment, relocation, or retention incentives that do not need 

Administrator approval; and 

7.  Approving Functional Area SMEs in the event of a rightsizing. 

E.  Office of Chief Counsel (OCC) is responsible for: 

1.  Reviewing and advising on legal sufficiency of FEMA matters to include: 

spending legislation, fiscal policy and potential ADA violations;  

16 

 
2.  Providing guidance, as necessary, regarding the appropriate use of the 

Disaster Relief Fund to charge CORE salaries; 

3.  Supporting OCFO and OCCHO in conducting the Annual Post-Action 

Review of direct charge COREs; 

4.  Reviewing and approving the use of COREs for limited non-Stafford Act 

activities in furtherance of FEMA’s mission; 

5.  Providing all COREs entering Federal service with an Initial Ethics 

Orientation as required by 5 C.F.R. § 2638.703; 

6.  Identifying all COREs that need to be designated as Confidential Financial 
Disclosure filers who must complete annual ethics training as required by 
5 C.F.R. § 2638.705, and auditing the content of said training for 
compliance with 5 C.F.R. § 2638.704; 

7.  Notifying all COREs of the requirement to file a new entrant report within 
30 days of assuming a position designated as requiring a Confidential 
Financial Disclosure Report per 5 C.F.R. § 2634.903(b); 

8.  Notifying all COREs designated as Confidential Financial Disclosure filers 

to file annual reports as required by 5 C.F.R. § 2634.903(a); 

9.  Reviewing Confidential Financial Disclosure reports, and providing 
advisory opinions to COREs, as appropriate, with regard to real or 
apparent conflicts of interest identified in the CORE’s financial disclosure 
report; 

10. Designating ethics attorneys to provide ethics advice to COREs; 

11. Providing legal review of performance and disciplinary actions; and 

12. Providing legal advice on policy development and implementation. 

F.  Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO) is responsible for: 

1.  Managing use and oversight of the DRF; 

2.  Ensuring the establishment of internal controls designed to prevent and 
detect non-compliance with applicable laws, standards, and accounting 
principles; 

3.  Reviewing and approving initial baseline and subsequent baseline 

adjustments for “distributed group” CORE positions; 

4.  Working with OCC and OCCHCO on the Annual Post-Action Review of 

direct charge COREs; 

5.  Conducting periodic audits and annual certifications of Direct Charge 
CORE positions and post-action reviews to validate and verify that all 
Direct Charge CORE duties are DRF-related and the appropriate 
approvals and documentation are evident, and taking action as 
appropriate on potential ADA violations; 

17 

 
6.  Referring instances that cannot be validated or verified as DRF-related 

duties to OCC or appropriate offices for further action;  

7.  Determining whether funding exists for each recruitment, relocation, or 

retention incentive request; and 

8.  Establishing an annual awards cap for COREs subject to funding. 

G.  Associate Administrator for Mission Support is responsible for reviewing all 

workload analysis disputes between the head of an Office or Directorate and 
OCCHCO and issuing a final decision. 

H.  Associate Administrator for Response and Recovery is responsible for 

deciding appeals from an FCO decision on whether to demobilize a CORE 
due to misconduct. 

I.  Office of the Chief Administrative Officer (OCAO) is responsible for: 

1.  Maintaining responsibility for the management and oversight of all 

Government-owned personal property within FEMA and for enforcing all 
applicable statutes, rules, regulations, and official guidance relating to 
Government-owned personal property; and 

2.  Administering the transit subsidy program. 

J.  Office of the Chief Component Human Capital Officer (OCCHCO) is 

responsible for: 

1.  Approving and administering all human capital programs and policies to 

include appointment and compensation programs; 

2.  Providing timely information to COREs regarding available benefit options, 
election periods, and technical direction on how to apply for available 
benefit options; 

3.  Making final decisions on all pay setting and requests for adjustments for 

CORE pay; 

4.  In consultation with the requesting Office or Directorate, approving 

workload analyses and staffing plans submitted by an Office or Directorate 
to justify CORE positions; 

5.  Providing Offices and Directorates with a list of COREs and their not-to-

exceed expiration dates who are assigned to the Office or Directorate on a 
biweekly basis; 

6.  In consultation with the requesting Office or Directorate, revalidating the 
request based on position management for a CORE position prior to the 
expiration of the position when an Office or Directorate requests a renewal 
of a CORE position; 

7.  Providing support for post-action reviews and the annual certifications, as 

well as supporting OCFO in execution of its responsibilities; 

18 

 
8.  Approving and administering the recruitment, appointment, placement, 

and separation of COREs, including setting the length of the appointment 
term; 

9.  Providing advice, guidance, training, and direct support to temporary duty 

supervisors and supervisors of record regarding how to properly document 
and address performance and misconduct;  

10. Coordinating affirmative employment programs with the Office of Equal 

Rights; 

11. Establishing and maintaining personnel records; 

12. Assuming responsibility for all EAP operations within FEMA; 

13. Administering the performance management and awards and recognition 

programs; 

14. Through the Human Resources cadre, ensuring that any demobilized 
CORE who has been deployed for at least 20 days has been issued a 
performance evaluation prior to departing the incident work site; 

15. Coordinating with OCC Ethics and supervisors of record to properly 
designate positions as Confidential Financial Disclosure filers and 
providing OCC Ethics with monthly reports identifying when a CORE has 
been appointed to or is no longer serving in a position designated as a 
Confidential Financial Disclosure filer; 

16. Providing technical guidance to Offices and Directorates in the planning of 

rightsizing procedures and approving the execution of rightsizing 
procedures; 

17. Providing direct support to COREs with respect to individual issues 

requiring action in connection with the administration of pay, benefits, and 
other personnel matters; 

18. Reviewing and approving requests for recruitment, relocation, or retention  

incentives;  

19. Administering FEMA’s Drug-Free Workplace program; and 

20. Providing information to managers and supervisors regarding the 

procedures for performance and disciplinary actions, recommendations for 
disposition in each case; and any relevant appeal process. 

K.  Office of the Chief Security Officer (OCSO) is responsible for: 

1.  Using standardized policies and procedures for verifying applicants’ 

personal identity; 

2.  Determining the fitness of applicants and COREs by conducting 

background checks; and 

3.  Authorizing facility access and issuing identification badges for COREs in 

a manner that ensures nationwide consistency across the CORE program.   

19 

 
L.  Division Chiefs are responsible for reviewing and providing a final decision on 

any hire via name request within their area of responsibility. 

M.  Second Level Supervisors are responsible for: 

1.  Overseeing the use of COREs consistent with the requirements 

established herein; 

2.  Requesting to advance a CORE’s basic rate of pay to step two, three, or 
four of the grade in conjunction with the CORE’s supervisor of record; 

3.  In coordination with OCCHCO, reviewing and issuing final decisions on 

disciplinary action appeals; 

4.  In coordination with OCCHCO, reviewing and issuing final decisions on all 

actions to terminate a CORE’s position for lack of FEMA need; 

5.  Reviewing and providing a final decision on all requests for merit-based 
increases, step increases, and to set pay for a new hire above the 
minimum rate for the position; and 

6.  Developing a Rightsizing Plan. 

N.  Federal Coordinating Officers (FCO) are responsible for deciding to 

demobilize a CORE due to misconduct. 

O.  Cadre Coordinators are responsible for: 

1.  Establishing and implementing individual performance goals on an annual 

basis for each position in the cadre, utilizing the position-specific 
behaviors found in the position’s PTB or any other sources approved by 
OCCHCO, and consulting with employees with Incident Management 
Titles in the cadre on the substance of the performance goals insofar as 
practical; and 

2.  Receiving and reviewing completed evaluations for their cadre personnel. 

Completed evaluations will be archived for each employee. 

P.  Selecting Officials are responsible for:  

1.  Recruiting and selecting COREs in accordance with this Manual, 

transmitting any request for hire via name request to his or her program 
area’s Division Chief (or higher) for review; and 

2.  Documenting the reasons for the selection of any CORE, and ensuring 
that all relevant records documenting such reasons are transmitted to 
OCCHCO for retention, including all interview notes. 

Q.  Supervisors of Record are responsible for: 

1.  Ensuring COREs are used for authorized purposes as outlined herein; 

2.  Providing day-to-day supervision of the performance and conduct of 

COREs under their supervision; 

3.  Assigning and evaluating work performed by a CORE when a CORE is 

not deployed; 

20 

 
4.  Requesting to renew appointments based on a workload analyses and 

staffing plan, subject to funding; 

5.  Requesting pay adjustments, conversion actions, and pay settings when a 

CORE voluntarily requests a change to a lower pay band or rate; 

6.  Requesting to advance a CORE’s basic rate of pay to step two, three, or 
four of the grade in conjunction with the CORE’s second level supervisor; 

7.  Initiating all recommendations for merit-based pay and step increases; 

8.  Establish performance and development plans, and evaluating employee 

performance in accordance with FEMA Manual 255-1-1; 

9.  Recommending performance awards consistent with FEMA guidelines; 

10. Retaining performance appraisals and all other documents related to the 

performance and/or conduct of COREs under their direct supervision, for a 
duration to be determined by FD 141-1, FEMA Records Management 
Program and relevant Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
(EEOC) regulations, if applicable; 

11. Submitting all requests for recruitment, relocation, or retention incentives  

to the head of their Office or Directorate for approval; 

12. Communicating proper conduct and performance standards to COREs 

consistent with FEMA policy; 

13. Receiving all deployment evaluations for COREs under their direct 

supervision and completing applicable progress reviews and annual 
performance ratings, considering as appropriate any deployment 
evaluations provided to the CORE by the temporary duty supervisor while 
deployed; 

14. Coordinating with OCC Ethics and OCCHCO to properly designate 

positions as Confidential Financial Disclosure Filers, and ensure that 
COREs complete required new entrant and annual ethics training 
requirements; 

15. Approving a CORE’s work schedule, telework schedule (if requested), and 

time and attendance records; 

16. Monitoring a CORE’s performance while teleworking in accordance with 

FM 123-9-1; 

17. Coordinating with COREs under their supervision to identify any real or 

apparent conflicts of interest or other standards of conduct issues prior to 
deployment, raising any such issues to the appropriate ethics counselor 
and, if applicable, mitigating any of these issues in accordance with 
recommendations from the ethics counselor and the temporary duty 
supervisor; 

18. Providing performance feedback and mentoring to maximize the success 

of a CORE in achieving performance goals and objectives; 

21 

 
19. Coordinating with OCCHCO’s Employee Relations Specialists to 

document incidents of poor performance and misconduct as they occur, 
and following up with the CORE to ensure that he or she understands the 
seriousness of his or her performance deficiencies or misconduct; 

20. Initiating personnel actions against COREs, to include discipline or 
removal for misconduct or poor performance after consulting with 
OCCHCO, and ensuring that any such actions are consistent with Merit 
Systems and EEO principles; 

21. In coordination with OCCHCO, documenting the reasons for all other 

personnel actions, including assignments, reassignments, promotions, 
demobilizations, rightsizing, and non-renewal of CORE appointments, and 
ensuring that such documentation is forwarded to OCCHCO along with 
any request or recommendation for personnel action; 

22. Collecting all government equipment prior to the effective date of a 

CORE’s removal or resignation; 

23. Overseeing and managing the resignation process when a CORE submits 
a resignation notification and forwarding all documentation to OCCHCO 
for processing; 

24. In coordination with OCCHCO, adopting the rightsizing procedures 

provided in this Manual; and 

25. Ensuring the professional development for COREs under their 

supervision. 

R.  Temporary Duty Supervisors are responsible for: 

1.  Ensuring COREs are used for authorized purposes as outlined herein; 

2.  Providing day-to-day supervision of the performance and conduct of 

deployed COREs; 

3.  Communicating proper conduct and performance standards to deployed 

COREs, included but not limited to, the basis for a deployment 
performance evaluation consistent with FEMA policy; 

4.  Completing performance evaluations for all COREs under their functional 

authority who are deployed for at least 20 days, and transmitting 
performance evaluation records to the CORE’s supervisor of record within 
30 days of the date of the demobilization; and 

5.  Advising the CORE and consulting with OCCHCO regarding issues of 
CORE misconduct and poor performance and referring allegations of 
misconduct to the CORE’s supervisor of record for review and 
coordination with OCCHCO prior to initiating disciplinary action.    

S.  COREs are responsible for the following, including, but not limited to: 

1.  Performing assigned duties and responsibilities acceptably; 

22 

 
2.  Conducting themselves in a manner that will bring credit to FEMA and 

supervisors directing their work, and observing the spirit and letter of the 
laws and regulations which govern the conduct of COREs; 

3.  Signing and complying with the terms and conditions of their appointments 
(including any conditions relating to receiving a security clearance), and 
other applicable FEMA directives; 

4.  Working at a Directed Work Location if directed by a supervisor or other 

properly designated FEMA official; 

5.  Reviewing benefit options and making selections within prescribed 

election periods; 

6.  Properly using, caring for, and protecting any assigned government 

property issued to them by FEMA. 

7.  Completing and signing a Self Certification of Health and Safety Checklist 
prior to beginning work, if the CORE’s home is his or her official duty 
station; 

8.  Following FEMA’s Absence and Leave and Scheduling of Work policies 

and procedures; 

9.  Completing Initial Ethics Orientation within 90 days of entry on duty as 

required by 5 C.F.R. § 2638.703; 

10. Complying with the ethics statutes in Title 18, United States Code, and the 
implementing ethics regulations promulgated by the Office of Government 
Ethics and DHS. COREs should seek guidance from his or her designated 
ethics attorney if issues arise that may be governed by these laws and 
regulations (contact FEMA’s Privacy Office for additional information and a 
listing of OCC Ethics Counselors);  

11. If designated as a Confidential Financial Disclosure filer, timely filing New 
Entrant and Annual OGE Form 450 reports (as required by 5 C.F.R. § 
2634 Subpart I); 

12. Completing annual ethics training, FQS training, and other required 

training; 

13. If the CORE is a reemployed civilian retiree receiving an annuity, providing 
a copy of his or her most recent annuity notice and all subsequent notices 
of change, indicating the monthly annuity amounts to OCCHCO prior to or 
at the time of appointment; 

14. Signing and complying with the conditions of a Continued Service 

Agreement (CSA) if approved to receive a recruitment, relocation, or 
retention incentive; 

15. Signing and abiding by the conditions of a CSA if selected to participate in 

a leadership development program; 

16. Returning all FEMA-owned equipment before separating from FEMA; and 

23 

 
17. Engaging in activities to promote their professional development. 

1-8.  Reporting Requirement 

The CORE program will be evaluated periodically to ensure that stated objectives 
are being met. Recommendations for improvement will be forwarded to the Chief 
Component Human Capital Officer and the Chief Financial Officer.  

1-9.  Forms Prescribed 

A.  FEMA Form 252-11-1-1, Request for CORE Action. 

B.  FEMA Form 30-35, Telephone Reference Check. 

C.  FEMA Form 106-1-1-1, Request for Work Schedule. 

D.  FEMA Form 119-7-1-3, Custody Receipt for Government Property On 

Personal Charge. 

E.  FEMA Form 123-9-0-1, Telework Application and Agreement Form. 

F.  FEMA Form 123-9-0-2, Employee Self Certification Health and Safety 

Checklist. 

G.  FEMA Form 254-1-1, Public Transportation Benefit Program Application. 

H.  Standard Form-50, Notification of Personnel Action. 

I.  Standard Form-52, Request for Personnel Action. 

J.  Standard Form 2809, Health Benefits Election Form. 

K.  TSP-1 Thrift Saving Plan Election Form. 

1-10.  No Private Right 

Nothing in this Manual shall be interpreted to create any right or benefit, 
substantive or procedural, enforceable at law by any party in any administrative 
or civil matter. 

1-11.  Questions 

Questions concerning the CORE Program should be addressed to OCCHCO at 
202-212-3962. Questions concerning the funding or certification process for 
Direct Charge CORE positions or requests for Distributed Cost COREs should be 
addressed to OCFO Field Based Operations at FEMA-fbo-action-
tracker@fema.dhs.gov.  

24 

 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 2:  RECRUITMENT AND HIRING 

2-1.  General 

A.  FEMA Offices and Directorates will identify the Selecting Official for each hire. 

B.  FEMA Offices and Directorates may elect to recruit and hire candidates via a 
vacancy announcement as specified in section 2-4, or via a name request 
pursuant to section 2-5. FEMA maintains the flexibility to use alternative hiring 
procedures not specified in this Chapter when necessary to meet its mission 
requirements. 

C.  Nepotism is prohibited by 5 U.S.C. § 3110 and is also a “prohibited personnel 
practice” under 5 U.S.C. § 2302(b)(7). Under 5 U.S.C. § 3110, a public official 
is prohibited from appointing, employing, promoting, advancing, or advocating 
for appointment, employment, promotion, or advancement of a relative in or to 
a civilian position in FEMA in which the public official is serving or over which 
the public official exercises jurisdiction or control of any individual who is a 
relative of the public official. Upon determining that a minimally qualified 
candidate is a relative or the relative of the Selecting Official, or of someone 
in the chain of command of the Selecting Official, the program office must 
refrain from taking action on the job vacancy and contact the servicing HR 
Specialist for guidance. Supervision of a relative is not generally considered 
to be “nepotism” but is prohibited as it presents an apparent conflict of 
interest. Supervision of employees with whom the supervisor has a “covered 
relationship” may also be an apparent conflict of interest (see 5 C.F.R. § 
2635.502). 

2-2.  Staffing Plans 

A.  Offices and Directorates authorized to fill CORE positions will conduct 
workload analyses every three years, or earlier if needed based on 
operational changes, to forecast and plan for future work and skills 
requirements based on historical data, technical estimates, directed 
requirements, and approved staffing models.  

1.  The workload analysis will first identify all activities performed by each 

position (e.g., PFT, CORE, and Reservist) within an Office or Directorate, 
and designate current and planned future activities.  

2.  The analysis will estimate how frequent the activity is performed, and the 
amount of time an employee will need to complete each of the identified 
activities for which a Distributed Group Activity Baseline has not been 
approved or is being modified. 

3.  The analysis may identify shortages or overages in current staffing needs, 
which will be documented and maintained by the Offices and Directorates 
until superseded by a subsequent workload analysis or other staffing 
initiative.  

25 

 
 
B.  Based on the workload analysis, Offices and Directorates requesting CORE 

positions will develop and submit staffing plans, subject to funding, to 
OCCHCO with the number of CORE positions by title, series, grade, and duty 
station.  

1.  OCCHCO will review the entity’s requested number of CORE positions 

and proposed length of appointment based on the workload analysis and 
staffing plan.  

2.  Upon OCCHCO’s review and approval of the staffing plan, OCCHCO will 
submit the plans to OCFO for approval if the plan includes a non-Direct 
Charge CORE, or a Distributed Group Activity Direct Charge CORE if the 
distributed group activity baseline has not been approved or has changed 
since the last approval. 

3.  Upon any needed confirmation from OCFO, OCCHCO will authorize an 

Office or Directorate to create or renew a set number of CORE Positions. 

4.  The Associate Administrator for Mission Support will review and resolve 
any disputes between an Office or Directorate and OCCHCO regarding 
the approval of a workload analysis or staffing plan.   

C.  Any request to add, move, rightsize, or adjust a CORE position (if rightsizing 
a position, see Chapter 12, Rightsizing) made between workload analysis 
cycles or that does not align with the current staffing plan must be submitted 
by the head of the Office or Directorate and will require a reexamination of the 
most recent workload analysis to determine whether the identified shortages 
or additional work exists to justify the requested position, its length, and pay 
band or grade. Upon OCCHCO’s review and approval of the staffing plan, 
OCCHCO will submit the plans to OCFO for approval if the plan includes a 
non-Direct Charge CORE, or a Distributed Group Activity Direct Charge 
CORE if the distributed group activity baseline has not been approved or has 
changed since the last approval. 

D.  Duty stations for COREs will be established by the supervisor of record in 

conjunction with OCCHCO. 

2-3.  Annual Direct Charge CORE Certification 

A.  An Annual Direct Charge CORE certification, validating and verifying the 

CORE’s performance of DRF related duties and the continued need for all 
CORE positions (which have not been requested or funded elsewhere in 
FEMA’s budget), is required by the Assistant Administrator, Associate 
Administrator, Regional Administrator, and any FEMA employee reporting 
directly to the Administrator. 

B.  CORE positions must be used to execute functions or activities funded solely 

by the DRF or DRS account and are not charged elsewhere in FEMA’s 
budget. COREs may be used to administer support to FEMA’s non-
permanent workforce hired under the Stafford Act, performing duties 
including, but not limited to, hiring and staffing, training and development, 

26 

 
 
personnel and payroll processing, legal support, developing and 
implementing disaster policies and decisions, supervising Stafford Act 
employees, maintaining information technology and telecommunications 
services for Stafford Act employees or events, financial management, 
property and facility management, and auditing and program oversight. 
OCFO and OCC will provide Directorates and Offices with supplemental 
guidance on the proper use of CORE positions as needed. 

C.  Offices and Directorates must also electronically maintain documentation 
supporting the creation, backfilling or reassignment of CORE positions. 
Offices and Directorates will maintain workload analyses, position 
justifications, and staffing plans. The electronic files2 are also subject to 
independent post-action compliance review by OCFO and/or OCCHCO.   

D.  Documentation requirements for “Direct Charge” COREs  

1. Comprehensive list of all COREs to include position title, area assigned, 

branch/office, duty station, grade, PIN, and CORE type.  

2. Algorithm(s), to include methodology and frequency of analysis, used to 

determine allocation of salary costs to open active disasters. 

3. A description of duties for each position or group of positions performing 
the same work that validates the relationship of work being performed to 
open, active disasters. Example: This Public Assistance (PA) Specialist 
will: (1) be responsible for the closeout of project worksheets, (2) deploy to 
disasters to support the development and obligation of PA projects, and (3) 
conduct eligibility review of public assistance projects.  

4. Baselines and supporting documentation for establishing the baselines for 

Distributed Activity Group “Direct-Charge” COREs.  

5. Documentation shall be maintained on OCFO’s SharePoint (see footnote 
2) and shall be made available to the OCFO and/or OCCHCO for review. 
Files must be maintained in accordance with the most current DHS records 
retention policy. 

2-4.  Procedures for Soliciting Candidates 

FEMA uses the procedures listed below to hire qualified candidates for CORE 
appointments unless a name request procedure is used (see section 2-5). 

A.  To advertise a CORE position, an Office or Directorate shall submit a 

Standard Form (SF-52) to OCCHCO with a position description. If desired, 
the Office or Directorate may also submit a draft vacancy announcement or 
instead, request that OCCHCO draft it. Additionally, the Office or Directorate 
may, but is not required to, submit a specialized experience statement and 
any assessment screen-out questions that should be included in the 
announcement for the purpose of screening out applicants who are not 

2 Electronic files should be uploaded to https://portalapps.fema.net/apps/ocfocore/Pages/default.aspx.  

27 

 
 
                                                           
minimally qualified for the position. Upon receipt of all required and optional 
documentation, the HR Specialist prepares (or reviews, if submitted) the 
Vacancy Announcement and sends the draft to the Office or Directorate for 
final approval. 

B.  The Office or Directorate, in consultation with the HR Specialist, may search 
for qualified candidates utilizing one or more of the following recruitment 
sources: 

1.  An email to all FEMA employees, FEMA employees who reside in a 

specific geographic area, or FEMA employees who already work in the 
Office or Directorate advertising the position; 

2.  Electronic posting on OPM’s USAJOBS website (https://usajobs.gov); 

3.  Outside sources, including but not limited to, other Federal agencies, state 

employment services, state and local emergency management 
organizations, professional societies, minority organizations, local 
colleges/universities and other educational facilities and sources; or 

4.  Other sources which, as approved by OCCHCO, will provide adequate 

competition. 

C.  At a minimum, the vacancy announcement posted through USA Jobs must 

include: 

1.  FEMA’s name; 

2.  Announcement number (for USA Jobs announcements only); 

3.  Title, series, and grade of the position, including promotion potential; 

4.  Opening and closing dates (except in the case of open announcements); 

5.  Duty location; 

6.  Number of vacancies; 

7.  Major duties of the position; 

8.  Length of appointment; 

9.  Qualification requirements; 

10. How to apply, including required supporting documentation; 

11. Statement that the appointment(s) is excepted from the competitive 

service, and are authorized under the Stafford Act; 

12. Statement that the selectee must sign a “conditions of employment” form; 

13. Statement that the selectee is subject to the “Every Employee Is An 

Emergency Manager” Memorandum, requiring capability to deploy for up 
to 30 consecutive days and changes to work locations, including a 
requirement to work at home in the event of emergencies or when 
otherwise directed; 

14. Equal employment opportunity statement; and 

28 

 
15. Reasonable accommodation statement. 

D.  All other vacancy announcement postings, authorized by section 2-4.B., must 

include, at a minimum: 

1.  Title, series, and grade of the position, including promotion potential; 

2.  Opening and closing dates (except in the case of open announcements); 

3.  Duty location; 

4.  Major duties of the position; 

5.  Length of appointment; 

6.  How to apply, including required supporting documentation; 

7.  Statement that the appointment(s) is excepted from the competitive 

service, and are authorized under the Stafford Act; 

8.  Statement that the selectee must sign a “conditions of employment” form; 

and 

9.  Statement that the selectee is subject to the “Every Employee Is An 

Emergency Manager” Memorandum, requiring capability to deploy for up 
to 30 consecutive days and changes to work locations, including a 
requirement to work at home in the event of emergencies or when 
otherwise directed. 

E.  Vacancy Announcements that are restricted to a particular geographical area 
or to FEMA employees will clearly identify any such restrictions and indicate 
that non-compliant applications will not receive consideration. 

F.  Once the Office or Directorate has approved the vacancy announcement, the 
Staffing HR Specialist posts the vacancy announcement via the sources 
previously agreed upon and notifies the Office or Directorate that the position 
has been posted. 

G.  Vacancy announcements shall be posted for a minimum of five days. If 
requested, OCCHCO may approve a shorter posting for good cause. 

H.  Minimum qualifications: Normally, OCCHCO reviews all submitted 

applications to ensure that applications have met the minimum qualifications 
and eligibility requirements and then refers all candidates deemed minimally 
qualified to the Selecting Official via a Certificate of Eligibles (CERT). 
Selecting Officials may request to receive all applications prior to OCCHCO’s 
review, in which case OCCHCO will conduct its review prior to issuance of 
any offer. Final qualification determinations are made by OCCHCO. 

I.  After a selection is made, the Selecting Official shall provide all selection 

documentation to OCCHCO for retention in accordance with A and B above 
(see section 3-9). The Selecting Official will indicate the action taken 
(selection, non-selection, declination, etc.) on each CERT and will return the 
CERT to the HR Specialist by the expiration date of the CERT, unless an 
extension is authorized by OCCHCO. 

29 

 
2-5.  Name Request 

A.  In lieu of utilizing the hiring procedures specified in section 2-4, Offices and 
Directorates may hire qualified candidates (eligible U.S. citizens, current 
Federal employees, or current FEMA COREs) via a name request to meet a 
hiring need or to promote a CORE to a grade outside of the CORE’s current 
position ladder. Such a promotion must include the same justification and 
approval established for name request hires (see Chapters 5 and 6 for more 
information on promotions). 

B.  The Office or Directorate must submit a justification that describes the 

individual’s qualifications with the SF-52 and resume. 

C.  Any name request must be approved in writing by the requesting 

organization’s Division Chief (or higher). 

D.  Name requests may be approved even if the Office or Directorate has not 

posted a vacancy announcement for the position or otherwise competed the 
position. 

E.  The HR Specialist will review the package to determine if the applicant meets 
the basic qualifications for the position and promptly notify the Selecting 
Official if the applicant is not minimally qualified. 

F.  Name request hiring actions must follow the interview, reference check, and 

job offer procedures outlined below. 

2-6. 

Interviews 

Interviews are conducted for candidates referred to the supervisor as a means of 
obtaining supplemental information on their qualifications. 

A.  At a minimum, the Selecting Official must interview the candidate selected for 
the position. The Selecting Official may designate one or more appropriate 
persons to conduct or participate in the interviews.  

B.  The Selecting Official should ask all candidates the same job-related 

questions and document the responses in writing. The Selecting Official 
should maintain such documentation for a minimum of two years. The 
Selecting Official should ask the same questions, in the same order, of all 
interviewed candidates. Follow-up questions to clarify information are 
permissible. It is preferable to conduct interviews in person and to use the 
same interview method for all applicants.  

C.  The Selecting Official should not ask questions regarding a candidate’s race, 
religion, sex, family status, national origin, religion, age, genetic background, 
health history, disability, political affiliation, or any other prohibited questions 
found in FEMA’s Interview and Selection Guidance, June 4, 2014.  

D.  The Selecting Official or his or her designee(s) may conduct a subsequent 

interview or contact one or more of the candidates for additional or clarifying 
information after completing and evaluating the initial interviews. The 

30 

 
 
 
supervisor should consult with the HR Specialist if a subsequent interview is 
deemed advisable to ensure that the reason for the subsequent interview is 
related to the requirements of the position. 

E.  Interview notes must be retained in accordance with section 2-10 and must 

not be destroyed. 

F.  In accordance with the Every Employee is an Emergency Manager (EE-EM) 
initiative,3 all employees conducting hiring interviews must explain and 
reiterate, using a set of standard questions and briefing points, the EE-EM 
vision that all COREs must be willing to receive incident support or incident 
management assignments. Additionally, all new COREs are required to sign 
an acknowledgment form confirming their understanding of the EE-EM policy. 
The supervisor must ensure that the EE-EM vision is explained in all initial 
interviews and that any candidate who is referred for hire or further 
examination has completed the applicable acknowledgment form. This form 
can be obtained from the serving HR Specialist. 

G.  All new COREs must acknowledge the requirement to work at a Directed 

Work Location, which may be the CORE’s Residence of Record or another 
alternate duty location, in the event of office closures, emergencies, or when 
otherwise directed. 

2-7.  Reference Checks 

The Selecting Official must check and document a candidate’s references before 
the candidate receives a job offer. Reference checking is a vital part of a 
successful hiring strategy and is primarily used to verify information provided by 
the candidate; better predict the candidate’s on-the-job success; and gain 
additional information about the candidate’s qualifications for the position. 
Selecting Officials may use FEMA Form 30-35, Telephone Reference Check, to 
satisfy the requirement to document reference checks. Selecting Officials should 
coordinate with OCCHCO prior to deciding not to hire a candidate because of a 
reference check. 

2-8.  Job Offers 

All offers of employment must be made by OCCHCO. The servicing HR 
Specialist must confirm qualifications and the proposed rate of pay for the 
candidate with the Selecting Official prior to extending an offer. Additionally, the 
HR Specialist will confirm acceptance of the offer and will consult with the 
Selecting Official in establishing an entrance on duty (EOD) date once the 
appropriate background check has been made by OCSO.  

3 See Memorandum from the Deputy Administrator, Every Employee an Emergency Manager—
Action Items, January 20, 2012. 

31 

 
 
 
 
                                                           
2-9.  Notification to Applicants 

OCCHCO Talent Acquisition Division will acknowledge receipt of all applications 
and notify all applicants if they have or have not been selected for the position. 

2-10.  Recordkeeping Requirements 

A.  Supervisors shall create, maintain, use and dispose of FEMA records in 

accordance with applicable law and FD 141-1, FEMA Records Management 
Program. 

B.  Pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1602.14 and in accordance with Equal Employment 
Opportunity Commission (EEOC) regulations, all personnel records made or 
kept by FEMA, including but not limited to, application forms submitted by 
applicants, name request justifications, interview notes, reference check 
documents, and other records having to do with hiring, shall be preserved for 
one year from the date of the making of the record or of the personnel action 
involved, whichever occurs later. 

C.  If applicable, when a non-selectee challenges the non-selection before an 

administrative or judicial body, OCCHCO and the supervisor must retain the 
aforementioned documentation until the final disposition of the charge or 
lawsuit. OCC will notify OCCHCO and the supervisor of any litigation holds 
and when documentation relating to a charge or lawsuit may be disposed of 
according to FEMA’s record retention policy. 

32 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 3:  APPOINTMENTS 

3-1.  Eligibility for Appointment 

All applicants selected for appointment to CORE positions must meet the 
following eligibility requirements: 
A.  U.S. Citizenship, subject to limited exceptions;4 

B.  Must be at least 18 years of age and:  

1.  Have graduated from high school or been awarded a certificate equivalent 

to graduating from high school; 

2.  Have completed a formal vocational training program;  

3.  Have received a statement from school authorities agreeing with their 
preference for employment rather than continuing their education; or 

4.  Be currently enrolled in a secondary school and either work only during 

school vacation periods or work part-time during the school year under a 
formal employment program; 

C.  Must comply with selective service registration for males born after 12/31/59; 
D.  Must satisfy fitness requirements for the position to which appointed;5 and 

E.  Must agree to accept an Incident Management or Incident Support 

assignment.6 

3-2.  CORE Appointments 

A.  COREs are hired under a Stafford Act appointment authority and their 

salaries and benefits are funded by the DRF, thus the scope of their duties 
must predominately carryout Stafford Act activities.   

B.  Individuals appointed to CORE positions are given time-limited appointments 
for a period of not less than two years but not to exceed four years unless the 
appointment is renewed for another term. The length of the appointment 
requested by the Office or Directorate should be commensurate with the 
expected amount of work available for the CORE in question (the 
appointment can be less than two years if appropriate). 

C.  A CORE appointment does not confer eligibility or priority consideration for a 

permanent appointment. 

D.  A CORE’s work schedule may be changed and a CORE may be assigned a 
Mission Essential, Incident Management, Incident Support, or Ancillary 

4 See DHS Management Directive 3120.2, Employment of Non-Citizens, March 22, 2004. 
5 See DHS Instruction 121-01-007, DHS Personnel Suitability and Security Program, June 2009. 
6 See Memorandum from the Deputy Administrator, Every Employee an Emergency Manager—
Action Items, January 20, 2012. 

33 

 
 
                                                           
Support title, irrespective of his or her position description, based on the 
operational needs of FEMA. 

E.  COREs are not subject to any protection afforded by reduction-in-force 

provisions, re-employment rights, or adverse action procedures established 
under any statutory or regulatory provision. 

F.  COREs must be ready to deploy wherever FEMA needs their services and 

have 24 hours to respond to a deployment order and may be required to work 
long hours under stressful and unfavorable conditions. 

G.  A CORE’s appointment will end on the Not to Exceed (NTE) date of his or her 
appointment, unless it is extended or renewed based on the needs of FEMA. 

H.  COREs may be appointed to supervisory positions and serve as supervisors 
of record for other Stafford Act employees, provided that the CORE is hired 
into a position description classified as supervisory and completes mandatory 
supervisory training. COREs may serve as a temporary duty supervisor 
during a deployment, so long as the work supervised arises out of the 
Stafford Act and the period of supervision is temporary and/or short-term. 

I.  COREs, who serve as the supervisor of record for PFTs on the date when 

this Manual becomes effective, may continue to serve in such capacity until 
the CORE’s current term expires. 

3-3.  Conditions of Employment 

All CORE appointees are required to sign a Conditions of Employment statement 
upon appointment, and upon renewal of an appointment. COEs contain 
significant, but not all of, the DHS/FEMA and other rules and regulations that 
COREs must abide by, including but not limited to: 
A.  Complying with FEMA’s deployment procedures and policies;7 

B.  Using electronic funds transfer for salary payments and travel 

reimbursements; 

C.  Maintaining eligibility for a government issued travel charge card, and abiding 
by the terms and conditions established by the bank issuing the travel card  
and FEMA (see FD 122-9, Travel Charge Card, or superseding document); 

D.  Presenting and conducting themselves at all times in compliance with the 

standards of ethical conduct provided by the Office of Governmental Ethics 
(see 5 C.F.R. part 2635), preserving the public trust, and adhering to 
DHS/FEMA rules and regulations; 

E.  Traveling in the most expeditious and cost effective manner, abiding by DHS  

and FEMA travel policy to make all travel arrangements; 

7 See FD 010-8, FEMA Incident Workforce Deployment, January 29, 2014. 

34 

 
 
                                                           
F.  If authorized to use a motor vehicle for official business, complying with all 
applicable laws, regulations, and policies related to official motor vehicle 
usage; 

G.  Abiding by the terms of use in all revocable licensing agreements with respect 
to all FEMA-issued property, and using FEMA-issued property for official 
purposes only; and 

H.  Complying with FEMA Manual 123-9-1, Telework, if their supervisor 

authorizes telework. 

Failure to comply with these conditions of employment, or any other standards of 
conduct, may result in disciplinary action, up to and including removal from 
Federal service (see Chapter 11). 

3-4.  Directed Work Location 

COREs will work at their Residence of Record or other designated locations by 
FEMA supervisors and managers, if so directed. COREs may be directed to work 
at alternate locations on days when their regular worksite is closed due, but not 
limited to, weather closures, localized emergencies, facility safety, or for 
operational needs. COREs working at a Directed Work Location are not 
teleworking. 

3-5.  Oath of Office 

A.  The following FEMA personnel are authorized to administer the oath of office 

to newly appointed COREs or to delegate this authority: 

1.  The Administrator; 

2.  Deputy Administrator; 

3.  Regional Administrators; 

4.  The Chief Component Human Capital Officer; 

5.  Federal Coordinating Officers; and 

6.  Federal Disaster Recovery Coordinators. 

B.  The above officials may delegate authority to administer the oath of office to 

an employee at initial onboarding. 

3-6.  Government Property 

A.  As soon as practicable after appointment, FEMA shall furnish each CORE 
with appropriate mobile communication and/or computing equipment as 
determined by the current property authorization list. 

B.  COREs shall keep the equipment charged and accessible, and shall seek 

prompt assistance for malfunctioning equipment. 

C.  All COREs are required to accept receipt of all FEMA-issued equipment and 
sign FEMA Form 119-7-1-3. By signing this form, the CORE acknowledges 

35 

 
 
 
 
acceptance of and responsibility for the equipment and becomes a Custodian 
of the equipment, as set forth in FEMA Directive 119-7, Federal Personal 
Property Management, dated September 24, 2013. Violation of this 
agreement may result in disciplinary action, up to and including removal. 

D.  COREs shall only use, display, or present their FEMA-issued government 

identification card for lawful and authorized purposes. 

3-7.  Reassignments to a New Position 

If a CORE is reassigned to a new position, the CORE must meet the minimum 
qualifications for the position and an Office or Directorate head must approve the 
reassignment. 

3-8.  Detail Assignments 

A.  A CORE may be temporarily placed on a detail to carry out a discrete 

function. If a CORE is placed on a detail, the duties and responsibilities 
performed by the CORE must be payable under the Stafford Act with the 
exception described in part C below. 

B.  Details to perform Stafford Act activities. Absent approval from OPM, a CORE 
may not be detailed to a competitive service position. A CORE may be placed 
on a detail assignment for up to 120 days that may be renewed for one 
additional 120 day period. OCCHCO must approve a CORE detailed to a 
position for more than 120 days or to positions at a higher pay level. See 
Chapter 14 for more information on rotational assignments. 

C.  A CORE may be detailed for mission and operational needs or for training to 

perform non-Stafford Act activities described below:  

1.  Non-Stafford Act Mission and Operational Detail. Pursuant to 6 U.S.C. § 

314 the Administrator is vested with the authority to carry out all 
authorities of FEMA. Upon a determination that urgent and compelling 
circumstances exist in order to carry out the FEMA mission or support to 
other Federal agency incident operations, a CORE may be placed on a 
temporary detail to perform non-Stafford Act activities under the following 
conditions:  

i.  The detail shall not exceed 90 days per appointment unless approved 

by OCC; and  

ii.  The detailed CORE’s salaries, benefits, and associated expenses must 
be paid from the account normally charged for carrying out the gaining 
program or activity for the duration of the detail. 

iii.  Note that training activities and other duties needed to prepare a 

CORE for a mission essential detail may be conducted outside of the 
90 day detail period but must be justified and approved in advance. In 
such circumstances, the training time and the detail time, will be 
charged to the receiving program or office. 

36 

 
 
 
2.  Non-Stafford Act Training Details. FEMA may authorize a non-Stafford Act 

detail of COREs under the following conditions:  

i.  A determination must be made that the training of the CORE, and thus 
the increased ability of that CORE to carry out future Stafford Act 
activities, is the primary purpose and benefit of the non-Stafford Act 
assignment;  

ii.  The detail may not exceed 30 days without a determination that a 

detail of more than 30 days is warranted;  

iii.  Extensions of these details beyond 30 days are made every 30 days 

thereafter and shall not exceed 90 days per appointment; and 

iv.   The detailed COREs may have their salaries and benefits funded by 

the DRF. 

3.  COREs carrying-out non-Stafford Act activities must be justified as either 
an urgent and compelling mission/operation-related detail or a training 
assignment. Under no circumstances, may FEMA use both of these 
justifications for the same non-Stafford Act activity. In both instances, the 
CORE is limited to one non-Stafford Act detail per appointment, unless 
approved by OCC.  

3-9.  Reappointment Procedures 

A.  OCCHCO provides each Office and Directorate with a list of COREs and their 

expiration dates on a biweekly basis. 

B.   A CORE’s appointment will end on the Not-to-Exceed (NTE) date of his or her 
appointment, unless it is renewed by the Office or Directorate. All requests to 
renew the appointment of a current CORE must be submitted by the 
supervisor of record to OCCHCO using an SF-52, Request for Personnel 
Action. 

C.  Two months before the end of a CORE’s appointment, if a supervisor of 

record determines that a CORE’s appointment should not be renewed, the 
supervisor must contact OCCHCO/Employee Relations on how to notify the 
CORE that the CORE’s appointment will not be renewed.   

3-10.  Resignation 

COREs may resign at any time prior to the termination or expiration of their 
appointments. COREs must state in writing the reason for the resignation and the 
requested effective date of the resignation. A CORE may request rescission of 
the resignation prior to the effective date, but FEMA is not obligated to consider 
or grant such a request. FEMA is not obligated to grant the request in order to 
avoid removal for misconduct or poor performance. FEMA may not deny the 
request for any reason prohibited by Title 29, U.S. Code, or any applicable EEOC 
regulations. 

37 

 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 4:  COMPENSATION PROVISIONS 

4-1.  Applicability 

The compensation provided to COREs includes the provisions found in this 
Chapter regardless of the pay plan covering the CORE, unless otherwise stated. 

4-2.  Establishment of CORE Pay Plan 

COREs are paid via an administratively determined “IC” pay plan. COREs paid 
via the GS scale or GS based pay bands will be transferred to the IC pay plan of 
either grades and steps or pay bands at their current rate of pay. FEMA 
managers, in conjunction with OCCHCO, are given the option to utilize one of 
two pay scales; a pay scale consisting of pay bands or a pay scale consisting of 
grades and steps (see Chapters 5 and 6). Offices or Directorates may change 
the pay plan for all COREs assigned to the Office or Directorate with OCCHCO 
approval. 

4-3.  Conversion Actions 

The first-level supervisor may recommend adjustment of pay upon conversion 
from another FEMA appointment to a CORE appointment (see sections 5-3 and 
6-3 for information on conversions that result in a decrease in pay). 

4-4.  Position Management and Classification 

The Position Management and Classification Manual, FM 252-2-1, June 19, 
2014, provides guidance for the classification and position management of 
CORE positions. The rules and procedures for position classification reviews 
(i.e., desk audits) and classification appeals found in FM 252-2-1 do not apply to 
CORE positions. 

4-5.  Locality Pay 

A.  Locality pay is an additional sum of money administratively-determined by 
OCCHCO and added to a CORE’s base pay to account for the difference 
between the pay of government workers and private sector workers in a given 
geographic location. Locality pay is considered a part of basic pay and is 
applied to the minimum and maximum rates of each pay plan.  

B.  COREs, such as IM COREs, who physically work full time from their 

residence of record, will receive the locality pay assigned to their residence of 
record’s locality pay area, even if the CORE reports or is assigned to a FEMA 
fixed facility with a different locality pay rate.  

C.  When a CORE moves from an official duty station in one locality pay area to 

an official duty station in a different locality pay area, OCCHCO will adjust the 
CORE’s basic pay to reflect the difference in the administratively-determined 
locality pay rates. Pay retention is not applicable to geographic changes in 
locality. 

38 

 
 
 
 
 
 
4-6.  Cost of Living Increase 

OCCHCO may periodically recommend that the Administrator adjust pay scales 
for the CORE program. For example, an adjustment may be appropriate to reflect 
a cost of living increase, but need not coincide with changes to pay and wage 
schedules by Congress, OPM, or OPM’s designee. In such circumstances, 
OCCHCO will review current CORE pay rates and recommend the proper 
percentage adjustment that is appropriate. 

4-7.  Pay Ceilings and Premium Pay 

Absent a waiver for the bi-weekly pay cap, the maximum rate of basic pay for a 
FLSA-exempt CORE may not exceed the rate payable for Level V of the 
Executive Schedule or the rate for GS-15 Step 10 employees (including locality 
pay), whichever is higher (see FM 253-2-1, Premium Pay). The maximum 
aggregate amount any CORE may receive in basic pay, bonuses, and 
allowances is the rate for Level I of the Executive Schedule. 

The rules and regulations governing premium pay, including, but not limited to, 
the bi-weekly and annual pay caps, overtime, compensatory time off, and night 
differential for COREs is found in FM 253-2-1, Premium Pay. 

4-8.  Recruitment, Relocation, or Retention Incentives 

A.  In General 

1.  A recruitment incentive is a one-time, lump-sum payment to a newly 

appointed CORE to a position that is determined to be critical to FEMA’s 
mission and in the absence of the incentive, would be difficult to fill. 

2.  A relocation incentive is a one-time, lump-sum payment to a current 

CORE who agrees to relocate with no break in service to accept a FEMA 
position in a different geographic area if the position is likely to be difficult 
to fill in the absence of the incentive. 

3.  A retention incentive is paid to a current CORE if the CORE has unusually 
high or unique qualifications, or an Office or Directorate has a special 
need for the CORE’s services that makes it essential to retain the CORE, 
and the CORE would likely leave the Federal service in the absence of a 
retention incentive. The CORE must have stated an intent to resign or 
retire, in writing, or must have submitted his or her resignation or 
retirement paperwork prior to authorization. 

4.  The employing office must consider at least the following factors, as 
applicable to the case at hand, when deciding whether to pay a 
recruitment or relocation incentive: 

i.  The success of recent efforts to recruit candidates for similar positions, 
including indicators such as offer acceptance rates, the proportion of 
positions filled, and the length of time required to fill similar positions; 

ii.  Recent turnover in similar positions; 

39 

 
 
 
iii.  Labor-market factors that may affect the ability of the office to recruit 

candidates for similar positions now or in the future; 

iv.  Special qualifications needed for the position; and 

v.  The practicality of using an advanced rate alone or in combination with 

a recruitment or relocation incentive. 

5.  The employing office must consider at least the following factors, as 

applicable to the case at hand, when deciding whether to pay a retention 
incentive: 

i.  The success of recent efforts to recruit candidates and retain 

employees with qualifications similar to those possessed by the CORE 
for positions similar to the position held by the CORE; and 

ii.  The availability in the labor market of candidates for employment who, 

with minimal training or disruption of service to the public, could 
perform the full range of duties and responsibilities assigned to the 
position held by the CORE. 

6.  The use of a recruitment, relocation, or retention incentive is not to be 
used as a substitute for traditional recruiting efforts that could yield a 
competent and qualified employee without the use of such an incentive.  

B.  Justification and Approval. The Selecting Official or supervisor of record shall 
submit a justification for any request for a recruitment, relocation, or retention 
incentive through the head of his or her Office or Directorate for approval. 
Office or Directorate heads may approve an incentive amount less than 
$20,000, or less than 25% of a CORE’s base pay. Any incentive request with 
a lump sum greater than or equal to $20,000, or greater than or equal to 25% 
of a CORE’s base pay must be submitted by the Associate Administrator or 
Office Chief (if the Office Chief reports directly to the Administrator) 
overseeing the requesting organization and be approved by the Administrator 
or designee, but at least by the Chief of Staff and OCCHCO. In all cases, 
OCCHCO must approve the incentive request and OCFO must certify the 
availability of funds prior to authorizing payment. All justifications shall 
include, at a minimum, the following information: 

1.  The amount and timing of the approved incentive; 

2.  For retention incentives, the payment schedule for the incentives and the 

maximum number of payments or end date for the payments; and 

3.  The basis for determination that the skills and work experience of the 
applicant or CORE are of substantial value, or that, without such an 
incentive, the position would be difficult-to-fill. The basis should be based 
on at least one factor from subsection A.4 if a recruitment or relocation 
bonus, or one factor from subsection A.5 if a retention incentive. 

C.  COREs who receive a recruitment, relocation, or retention incentive must sign 
and comply with the terms of a Continuing Service Agreement (CSA). See 
Chapter 15, Continuing Service Agreements, for more information.  

40 

 
4-9.  Offset Provision for Civilian Retirees 

A.  Retirees from the federal service who are receiving a federal retirement 

annuity and become reemployed by the federal government, absent a waiver, 
will have their salaries reduced by the amount of the annuity they are entitled 
to receive during the period of reemployment, pursuant to 5 U.S.C. § 8344(a). 

B.  COREs who are reemployed annuitants must provide OCCHCO with a copy 

of their most recent annuity notice issued by OPM, and all subsequent notices 
of change, indicating the monthly annuity amount to the Payroll and 
Processing Operations Division, OCCHCO prior to or at the time of 
appointment. 

41 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 5:  COMPENSATION (PAY BANDS) 

5-1.  General 

A.  This Chapter addresses the rules and procedures associated with 

compensating COREs via pay bands, which is one of the pay scales under 
the IC pay plan.  

B.  Each pay band established for the IC pay plan corresponds to a range of pay 
and classification levels, such that bands replace grades and steps, and 
series are retained. Positions are classified by title, career path, and 
occupational series. The pay range for each pay band is equivalent to the pay 
range of GS and IC grades and steps within the pay band. A CORE may not 
receive base pay in excess of his or her pay band unless they are promoted 
to a position classified at a higher pay band. 

1.  Band 1 corresponds to GS 1 to GS 6. 

2.  Band 2 corresponds to GS 7 to GS 9. 

3.  Band 3 corresponds to GS 10 to GS 11. 

4.  Band 4 corresponds to GS 12 to GS 13. 

5.  Band 5 corresponds to GS 14 to GS 15. 

C.  The major duties and responsibilities of each CORE position are included in 
the position description. The position description is analyzed by a Human 
Resources Classification Specialist to determine the title and pay band of the 
position. This analysis of the work to be performed and comparison of the 
work to established standards is referred to as position classification and 
applies the principle of equal pay for equal work. 

D.  Exceptions to the policies and procedures contained within this Chapter may 
be authorized by the CCHCO to respond to an emergent and unexpected 
mission need arising from a Level I disaster, to alleviate severe hardship to 
individuals resulting from any error on the part of FEMA in effecting personnel 
actions, or to address unusual situations that were not anticipated when this 
policy was drafted. 

5-2.  Setting Basic Rate of Pay 

A.  The Selecting Official is delegated the authority to assign a yearly basic pay 
amount within the position classified pay band. Pay setting criteria may 
include:  

1.  The prior salary of the candidate;  

2.  The overall qualifications of the candidate;  

3.  The recency of the individual’s relevant experience;  

4.  The qualifications and pay of employees in similar positions in the work 

unit;  

42 

 
 
5.  Salary comparability to non-Federal pay rates for similar work;  

6.  Special qualification requirements associated with the vacant position;  

7.  Turnover rates for the position;  

8.  Scarcity of qualified candidates; or 

9.  Programmatic urgency. 

B.  Any request for a rate above the minimum rate within the position classified 
pay band(s) must include a justification drafted by the Selecting Official and 
approved by the second level supervisor. This justification must include:  

1.  The candidate’s name; 

2.  The title, grade, and recommended rate of the vacant position; and 

3.  The factors and determination that support the pay rate determination. 

C.  Pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1602.14 and in accordance with Equal Employment 
Opportunity Commission regulations, the justification for setting pay higher 
than the minimum rate shall be preserved for one year from the date of its 
making. 

5-3.  Pay Adjustments 

Adjustments to pay within a classified pay band may be requested by the 
supervisor of record for review and approval by the Human Resources Specialist 
without written justification or approval from the second level supervisor. Such 
adjustments may be given under the following circumstances: 

A.  Reassignment of a CORE from one position to another position within the 

same classified pay band if the responsibilities of the new position warrant an 
increase or decrease in base pay to further the principles of equal pay for 
equal work; 

B.  A pay change, of either an increase or decrease, to compensate for an 

increase or decrease in locality pay in conjunction with a move to another 
geographic area; or 

C.  Receipt of a merit-based increase (see section 5-4). 

5-4.  Merit-Based Increase 

A.  A CORE who is not already receiving the maximum basic pay for his or her 

position may receive a merit-based increase at the conclusion of the 
performance year. 

B.  A CORE, who receives a rating of record of “Achieved Expectations”, or 
equivalent, is eligible for a merit-based increase of up to 3%; a rating of 
record of “Exceeded Expectations” or equivalent, is eligible for a merit-based 
increase of up to 4%; or a rating of record of “Achieved Excellence” or 
equivalent, is eligible for a merit-based increase of up to 5%. 

43 

 
 
 
C.  A CORE, who receives a rating of “unacceptable”, or equivalent, is not eligible 

for a merit-based increase.8 

D.  A CORE’s supervisor of record must send an SF-52, approved by the second 

level supervisor, to the Payroll and Processing Division, OCCHCO for 
processing, certifying that the CORE has received an annual rating of record 
for the most recent performance cycle and that the percentage increase to 
basic pay sought by the supervisor of record is in compliance with the 
requirements established by section 5-3 above. 

5-5.  Promotion 

A.  A promotion is a personnel action that moves a CORE from one classified 
band to another in the same career path. A promotion may also be the 
selection and appointment of a CORE to a position in another career path or 
region to which the CORE applies. This may result in a combination of an 
increase in the CORE’s salary and a change in position description. If the 
CORE is moved to a different position, in the same pay band, with the same 
or similar duties, the personnel action is a reassignment with retained pay.  

B.  The CORE’s supervisor of record must certify that the CORE’s most recent 
performance rating was at least “Achieved Expectations” or equivalent, next 
higher graded work exists for the CORE to perform, the CORE’s new position 
description captures the duties to be performed, and the higher graded 
position is approved and funded. A CORE may be hired into a position in a 
higher pay band via vacancy announcement or a name request, if the Office 
or Directorate has an existing higher position available or creates a new 
position according to the procedures detailed in section 2-2. 

C.  The new basic pay rate upon promotion may be set at any level in the new 
band, but the CORE must receive at least a six percent minimum pay 
increase over his or her previous salary. If the CORE moves to a different 
career path, any band in the new career path would be considered a “new 
band” for the purposes of determining his or her salary. 

5-6.  Change to a Lower Pay Band 

When a CORE moves from his or her current position to a position at a lower pay 
band the action is referred to as a change to a lower pay band. The 
circumstances underlying the supervisor’s recommendation to initiate a change 
to a lower pay band will determine how pay is set. 

A.  A CORE who exhibits poor performance and fails to improve acceptably will 
be terminated (see Chapter 11 for more information). In rare occasions, 
COREs may be demoted in lieu of removal due to poor performance. In such 
circumstances, pay is set at a lower pay band such that there is a reduction in 

8 Supervisors who encounter poor performance should consult Chapter 11: Procedures for 
Misconduct and Poor Performance. 

44 

 
 
 
                                                           
pay equivalent to at least two steps (using the pay intervals from the grades 
and steps scale) below the higher banded position.  

B.  When a CORE requests a change to lower pay band for personal reasons or 
convenience, including through application for an announced vacancy at a 
lower pay band, the action is considered a voluntary change to a lower pay 
band. For voluntary changes to a lower pay band, the new rate will be set 
according to the procedures in section 5-2, and should include any merit 
based increases that the CORE would have received during the qualified 
period. 

C.  The reclassification of a position by OCCHCO to a lower pay band will result 
in a reduction in pay and pay will be set in accordance with the classification 
decision. Pay will be set according to the procedures detailed in section 5-2. 
No appeal of the reclassification decision or pay retention is permitted, 
subject to any applicable collective bargaining agreement. 

45 

 
 
 
CHAPTER 6:  COMPENSATION (GRADES AND STEPS) 

6-1.  General 

A.   A CORE may be paid via an administratively-determined “IC” grades and 

steps pay scale, as described in this Chapter. The pay scale consists of 15 
pay grades (IC-1 to IC-15) with 10 steps per grade. The pay sums associated 
with the IC pay scale mirror the GS scale. 

For example, a CORE hired at IC-11, Step 1 under the IC pay plan would be 
paid at the same basic rate of pay as a GS-11, Step 1 employee under the 
GS scale.  

B.  Exceptions to the policies and procedures contained within this Chapter may 
be authorized by the CCHCO to respond to an emergent and unexpected 
mission need arising from a Level 1 disaster, to alleviate severe hardship to 
individuals resulting from any error on the part of FEMA in effecting personnel 
actions or to address unusual situations that were not anticipated when this 
policy was drafted. 

6-2.  Setting Basic Rate of Pay 

A.  The position description is the primary source of information used in setting 
pay in the IC pay series. Other information used in setting pay is (1) the 
geographic location (official duty station) of the position; and, (2) the 
individual’s prior employment, salary history, and qualifications. 

B.  The major duties and responsibilities of each CORE position are included in 
its position description. The position description is analyzed by a Human 
Resources Specialist to determine the title and grade range of the position. 
This analysis of the work to be performed and comparison of the work to 
established standards is referred to as position classification and applies the 
principle of equal pay for equal work. 

C.  A new appointment is an individual’s first appointment as an employee of the 
Federal government. Pay for all new COREs will be set at the minimum rate 
(Step 1) of the grade of the position, unless the CORE is approved for an 
advanced rate (see part E Advanced to a Higher Step). 

D.  If the CORE has prior federal service (including as a current or former FEMA 
employee), OCCHCO sets the basic rate of pay at the minimum rate for the 
position, unless they receive an advanced rate (as discussed below) or the 
highest pay rate previously received during Federal service, whichever is 
higher.9 Before setting pay at the highest pay rate previously received during 
Federal service, the Selecting Official should consider: 

1.  The overall qualifications of the individual; 

2.  The recency of the individual’s relevant experience; 

9 If the employee’s highest previously-received pay rate falls between two steps of the IC pay 
scale, the Selecting Official may request that the employee’s pay be set at the higher step. 

46 

 
 
                                                           
3.  The qualifications and pay of employees in similar positions in the work 

unit; and 

4.  The potential impact on the morale of those employees if the candidate 

were to receive the maximum payable rate. 

E.  Advanced to a Higher Step.  

1.  Prior to a candidate entering on duty, the Selecting Official will consider 
whether pay above the minimum rate of the grade should be made for a 
CORE. 

2.  Pay rate decisions maintain equity between the pay of the new hire and 

that of current employees, including COREs, performing comparable work. 
The advanced rate may not exceed step 10 of the applicable grade to 
which the candidate will be hired. 

3.  Required documentation and approval: 

i.  A request to advance a CORE up to step four may be submitted by the 
first or second level supervisor to OCCHCO for approval. A request to 
advance a CORE to step five and above must be submitted by the 
head of an Office or Directorate to OCCHCO for approval. The request 
must be accompanied by a written justification that includes: 

a.   The candidate’s name; 

b.  The title, grade, and recommended rate of the vacant position; and 

c.  The factors and determination that support the pay rate 

determination. This may include, but is not limited to, salary 
comparability, special qualification requirements, turnover rates, 
scarcity of qualified candidates, or programmatic urgency. 

ii.  The first or second level supervisor must submit a recommendation for 
an advanced rate appointment well in advance of establishing an 
entrance on duty date to ensure sufficient time for OCCHCO to act on 
the request before the appointment becomes effective. 

iii.  Pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1602.14 and in accordance with EEOC 

regulations, the justification shall be preserved for one year from the 
date of its making. 

6-3.  Pay Adjustments 

Adjustments to pay within a grade after the pay rate is initially set may be given 
under the following circumstances: 

A.  Reassignment of a CORE from one position to another position if the 

responsibilities of the new position warrant an increase or decrease in base 
pay to further the principles of equal pay for equal work; 

47 

 
 
B.  A pay change, of either an increase or decrease, to compensate for an 

increase or decrease in locality pay in conjunction with a move to a different 
official duty station in another geographic area; or 

C.  Receipt of a step increase (see section 6-4). 

6-4.  Step Increases 

A.  A CORE who is not already at the highest step of his or her current grade 
may be advanced to the next higher step at the conclusion of the waiting 
period assigned to their current rate. 

1.  While FEMA’s Stafford Act authorities permit FEMA the authority to 

compensate without regard to Title 5, FEMA adopts the waiting periods for 
advancement to the next highest step established by 5 U.S.C. § 5335 and 
its implementing regulation at 5 C.F.R. § 531.405 as a matter of policy for 
all COREs paid via grades and steps. 

2.  A CORE is not automatically entitled to receive a step increase at the 

conclusion of his or her waiting period.  

3.  To receive the step increase, the CORE’s supervisor of record must sign 
the step increase document and return to OCCHCO for processing, 
certifying that the CORE: 

i.  Has completed the requisite waiting period;  

ii.  Has not received an equivalent increase during the waiting period; and  

iii.  His or her summary rating level for the most recent performance was 

at least “Achieved Expectations” or equivalent. 

4.  If a supervisor determines that a CORE’s performance is not at an 

acceptable level, the supervisor should contact OCCHCO/Employee 
Relations at least two months before the end of the required waiting period 
for a step increase, to draft a notification to the CORE stating that the 
CORE’s next step increase is being withheld, the reason for the negative 
determination, and what the CORE must do to improve his or her 
performance to be granted the step increase. 

B.  Prior to the completion of the requisite waiting period, a supervisor may 
recommend one additional step increase if warranted by the CORE’s 
performance. To receive the additional step increase, the CORE’s supervisor 
of record must send a justification describing the accomplishments and 
performance exhibited by the CORE that would warrant an increase in pay, 
and an SF-52 approved by the second level supervisor to OCCHCO for 
processing. OCCHCO will review the request to ensure COREs who exhibit 
similar performance receive similar pay. 

48 

 
 
 
6-5.  Promotion 

A.  A promotion is a personnel action that moves a qualified CORE from one 

grade to another in the same career path or to a grade in another career path 
in combination with an increase in the CORE’s salary. 

B.  The CORE’s supervisor of record must certify that the CORE’s most recent 
performance rating was at least “Achieved Expectations” or equivalent, next 
higher graded work exists for the CORE to perform, the CORE’s new position 
description captures the duties to be performed, and the higher graded 
position is approved and funded. A CORE may be hired into a position at a 
higher grade via vacancy announcement or a name request, if the Office or 
Directorate has an existing higher graded position available or creates a new 
position according to the procedures detailed in section 2-2.  

C.  For promotions, pay is set at the lowest pay rate in the new grade; however, 
the new pay rate must exceed the CORE’s existing pay rate by at least two 
steps. If the annual rate of the new position falls between two steps of the 
new grade, the higher step may be used. For example, an IC-7, Step 3 at 
FEMA HQ, with an annual pay rate of $45,473, who is promoted to an IC-8, is 
entitled to at least an increase in pay equal to two steps from the position 
from which she was promoted at IC-7 Step 5, or $48,315. Because the annual 
pay rate for an IC-8, Step 1 is $47,212, it does not satisfy the two-step 
increase requirement. Therefore, pay is set at IC-8, Step 2 or $48,786. 

6-6.  Change to Lower Grade 

When a CORE moves from his or her current position to a position at a lower 
grade the action is referred to as a change to lower grade. The circumstances 
underlying the supervisor’s recommendation to initiate a change to lower grade 
will determine how pay is set. 

A.  A CORE who exhibits poor performance and fails to improve acceptably will 
be terminated (see Chapter 11 for more information). In rare occasions, 
COREs may be demoted in lieu of removal due to poor performance. Upon 
demotion, the pay rate must be set at least two steps below the current pay 
rate. If the two-step reduction results in a rate that falls between two steps of 
the lower grade, the lower step must be used. 

B.  When a CORE requests a change to lower grade for personal reasons or 
convenience, including through application for an announced vacancy at a 
lower grade, the action is considered a voluntary change to a lower grade. 
For voluntary changes to a lower grade, the new rate should include any step 
increase that the CORE would have received during the qualifying period and 
pay should be set at: 

1.  The minimum  payable rate of basic pay for the lower grade; or 

2.  The highest previous rate received under Federal service, if the action is 
fair and equitable after considering the factors listed in section 6-2, and if 
the action serves the convenience of the Government. 

49 

 
 
C.  The reclassification of a position by OCCHCO to a lower grade range will 
result in a reduction in pay and pay will be set in accordance with the 
classification decision. Pay will be set according to the procedures detailed in 
section 6-2. No appeal of the reclassification decision or pay retention is 
permitted, subject to any applicable collective bargaining agreement. 

50 

 
 
 
7-1.  General 

CHAPTER 7:  BENEFITS 

A.  With certain exceptions that apply to individuals such as reemployed 

annuitants, CORE are eligible for Federal Employees Health Benefits (FEHB), 
Federal Employees Dental/Vision Insurance Program (FEDVIP), Federal 
Employees Group Life Insurance (FEGLI), Federal Employees Retirement 
System (FERS), Flexible Spending Account (FSA), Federal Long Term Care 
Insurance (FLTCIP), and participation in the Thrift Savings Plan (TSP). 

B.  COREs must review their benefit options and make selections within 

prescribed election periods. OCCHCO, Employee Services Division, will 
provide timely information to COREs with regard to available benefit options, 
election periods, and technical direction regarding how to apply for these 
options.  

C.  OCCHCO staff is prohibited from making any type of recommendation that 
may influence a CORE’s benefit election. COREs need to evaluate cost, 
personal needs, and eligible family members and their needs when preparing 
to make a benefits selection. 

D.  FEMA applies guidance contained within OPM Benefits Administration Letter, 
No. 13-203, when extending benefits to legally married same-sex spouses 
and common law marriages in certain states, of Federal employees and 
annuitants, and to the children of those marriages. 

7-2.  Health Benefits 

A.  COREs are given an opportunity to enroll in the Federal Employees Health 
Benefits Program (FEHB) at the time of appointment to a CORE position. 

B.  A CORE must decide whether to elect to enroll in FEHB within 60 days after 
the effective date of appointment. A CORE who elects to enroll must submit 
SF-2809 to his or her HR Specialist. A CORE who fails to return the 
completed form within the prescribed time frame, or who cancels enrollment 
will not have another opportunity to enroll until an FEHB open season is 
offered (generally once per year), or as a result of a Qualifying Life Event 
(QLE). 

C.  The CORE’s share of the premium for the benefits plan chosen will be 

deducted from the CORE’s bi-weekly pay on a pre-tax basis.  A CORE may 
cancel health benefits coverage during an extended period of non-pay status 
or may continue the coverage and pay the premium each pay period or upon 
return to pay status. Effective dates for enrollment, changes in enrollment, 
and cancellation of enrollment will be established in accordance with 
guidance prescribed by the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM). 

51 

 
 
7-3.  FEDVIP (Dental and Vision) Program 

A.  The Federal Employees’ Dental/Vision Program (FEDVIP) is a supplemental 
program offering vision and dental coverage to Federal employees, retirees, 
and their eligible family members on an enrollee-pay-all basis.  

B.  COREs, retirees, and their eligible family members are eligible to enroll in 

FEDVIP if they are eligible to enroll in FEHB and the CORE’s position is not 
excluded by law or regulation.10 COREs who are not enrolled in FEHB may 
still be eligible for FEDVIP, providing they are eligible to enroll in FEHB. 

C.  New and newly eligible COREs may enroll within 60 days after they become 
eligible. COREs may also enroll during the annual Federal Benefits Open 
Season in November and December. 

7-4.  Life Insurance 

Unless a CORE elects to waive coverage prior to the end of the pay period in 
which appointed, eligible COREs are automatically insured for basic life coverage 
on the day the CORE enters on duty in a pay status. Within 60 days after the 
effective date of appointment to a CORE position, a CORE who has basic life 
insurance coverage may also elect standard, additional, and/or family optional 
insurance. A CORE may decrease or waive all life insurance coverage at any 
time. Effective dates of life insurance coverage and waivers will be in accordance 
with the Federal Employees Group Life Insurance (FEGLI) program and OPM 
guidance. FEGLI is not included in the annual benefits open season and open 
season periods are rare. 

7-5.  Retirement 

A.  As a general rule, employees appointed to CORE positions are automatically 
covered by the Federal Employees Retirement System (FERS). Exceptions 
include certain former Federal employees who were hired prior to January 1, 
1984, and were covered under the Civil Service Retirement System (CSRS). 
Retirement coverage, whether FERS, CSRS, or CSRS Offset, begins on the 
effective date of appointment to a CORE position.  

B.  COREs who are covered by FERS, and first appointed: 

1.  Before 2013, contribute 0.8% of pay to the Civil Service Retirement and 

Disability Fund (CSRDF); 

2.  In 2013, contribute 3.1% of pay to the CSRDF; or 

3.  After December 31, 2013, contribute 4.4% of pay to the CSRDF. 

4.  Employee contributions to the CSRDF may change according to changes 

in the FERS program. 

10 See 5 C.F.R. § 894.302 or an HR Specialist to determine whether a position is excluded from 
FEDVIP. 

52 

 
 
 
 
                                                           
7-6.  Thrift Savings Plan 

A.  The Thrift Savings Plan (TSP) is a tax-deferred retirement savings and 

investment plan that provides COREs with an opportunity to save a portion of 
their income for retirement and reduce current taxes.  

B.  Eligibility for participation is determined by FEMA in accordance with law and 
TSP regulations published by the Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board. 

C.  COREs, covered by FERS, appointed after July 31, 2010, are automatically 

enrolled in the TSP. 

D.  COREs can elect, change their election, or stop their contributions at any time 
through the Employee Personal Page (EPP) or by completing and submitting 
a TSP-1 Election form. 

7-7.  Federal Long-Term Care Insurance Program 

Long-Term Care insurance provides financial protection to enrollees who are in 
need of assistance with their daily activities due to a lengthy or lifelong illness, 
injury, or cognitive impairment. Long-Term Care insurance is medically 
underwritten; therefore, a CORE and eligible family members must qualify for the 
insurance. Eligible COREs can enroll at any time; however, newly-hired COREs 
and their spouses receive a 60-day window to enroll using an abbreviated 
underwriting process. 

7-8.  Flexible Spending Accounts 

Flexible Spending Accounts (FSA) allows COREs to set aside money on a pre-
tax basis to cover out-of-pocket health care or dependent care expenses. A 
newly eligible CORE has 60 days from the date of his or her appointment to elect 
to set aside this money by payroll deduction. A CORE who wishes to participate 
or continue to participate from one plan year to the next must make a positive 
election during the annual open season, which runs concurrent with the health 
insurance open season. Changes can be made outside of the benefits open 
season as a result of a Qualifying Life Event (QLE). 

7-9.  Employee Assistance Program (EAP) 

COREs have access to confidential work life enhancement services through the 
EAP, free of charge. The EAP is a professional resource available to help 
COREs resolve life challenges. A CORE may call the toll-free EAP number at 1-
800-222-0364, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. A CORE can also access EAP 
services online at www.FOH4you.com. 

7-10.  Transit Subsidy Program 

Subject to the availability of funds, all COREs who are currently using public 
transportation to commute to work are eligible for transit subsidy benefits.  The 
Office of the Chief Administrative Officer (OCAO), Support Services and Facilities 
Management Division (SSFMD), administers the transit subsidy program. 

53 

 
 
 
 
 
COREs interested in receiving a transit subsidy must complete FEMA Form 254-
1-1, Public Transportation Benefit Program Application, and email it to the Transit 
Subsidy Program at FEMA-Transit-Subsidy@fema.dhs.gov.  

54 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 8:  PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT 

8-1.  General 

A.  CORE performance management shall comply with the Employee 

Performance Management Program as established by FM 255-1-1. 

B.  A CORE who receives a rating of unacceptable, or equivalent, on his or her 

most recent appraisal (rating of record) may be subject to removal in 
accordance with Chapter 11 of this Manual. Such removal should be effected 
regardless of the timing of the CORE’s NTE date. However, a supervisor is 
not precluded from terminating a CORE prior to issuance of a performance 
appraisal, so long as the supervisor has sufficient documentation to justify the 
action and has consulted with an OCCHCO Employee Relations Specialist. 

8-2.  Performance Management for CORE-Is 

The performance of IMAT members appointed as CORE-Is are subject to FD 
010-7, and are not covered by FEMA Manual 255-1-1 or this Chapter. 

8-3.  Deployment Performance Management 

A.  When deployed to a disaster for twenty days or more, a CORE qualified in a 
FQS position, and deployed to that position, will receive an evaluation of the 
CORE’s deployment performance by a temporary duty supervisor. The 
evaluation period consists of the entire time the CORE is deployed. 

B.  COREs will be evaluated on their performance based on the performance 

goals developed by Cadre Coordinators for each position within a Cadre. The 
goals will align with the position-specific knowledge of program and technical 
protocols contained in the position’s PTB, and the core competencies for 
deployed personnel. 

C.  The temporary duty supervisor will complete a deployment evaluation in a 
timely manner and transmit the evaluation to the CORE’s supervisor of 
record. Additionally, the HR Unit Leader and his or her staff will ensure that 
any demobilized CORE who is deployed for at least twenty days is issued a 
performance evaluation prior to departing the incident work site. 

D.  If a CORE’s deployment performance does not meet achieved expectations, 
the CORE’s supervisor of record in coordination with the Cadre Coordinator 
and/or temporary duty supervisor will collaborate with OCCHCO to determine 
the appropriate course of action. 

E.  A CORE’s progress review and appraisal (rating of record) should include 
input received after a deployment from the temporary duty supervisor. 
However, the supervisor of record has the discretion to consider the 
deployment performance evaluation as he or she deems appropriate when 
completing progress reviews and the annual appraisal (rating of record) 
subsequent to the deployment. 

55 

 
 
 
F.  If the CORE is deployed at the time that the CORE’s quarterly progress 

review should take place, the supervisor of record will work with the CORE 
and his or her temporary duty supervisor to obtain feedback on the CORE’s 
performance during the applicable quarter. 

56 

 
 
 
CHAPTER 9:  AWARDS AND RECOGNITION 

9-1.  Awards and Recognition Program 

The Awards and Recognition program applicable to Title 5 employees and 
captured in FEMA Manual 255-4-1 is also applicable to COREs, with the 
exception of CORE-Is. Awards and recognition policy applicable to CORE-I 
IMATs is found in FD 010-7. 

57 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 10:  SCHEDULING OF WORK AND TELEWORK 

10-1.  Scheduling of Work and Telework 

A.  FM 106-1-1, Scheduling of Work, applies to all COREs. To establish a work 

schedule a CORE must submit a copy of FEMA Form 106-1-1-1, Request for 
Work Schedule, to his or her supervisor of record for approval.  

B.  COREs will use FEMA approved timekeeping policies and procedures to 

account for all hours of work. 

C.  FM 123-9-1, Telework Manual, applies to all COREs. To establish a telework 
agreement and schedule a CORE must submit a copy of FEMA Form 123-9-
0-1, Telework Application and Agreement Form, and FEMA Form 123-9-0-2, 
Employee Self-Certification Safety and Health Checklist, to his or her 
supervisor of record for approval.  

D.  COREs whose Residence of Record is their permanent duty station are not 

teleworking when on duty. However, all COREs whose Residence of Record 
is their official duty station must have a completed and approved Employee 
Self-Certification Safety and Health Checklist forms on-file with FEMA prior to 
being permitted to work.  

58 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 11:  PROCEDURES FOR MISCONDUCT AND POOR PERFORMANCE 

11-1.  General 

A.  COREs are non-Title 5 employees and, therefore normally do not have 

appeal rights to the Merit Systems Protection Board. 

B.  Supervisors must communicate proper conduct and performance standards. 
Supervisors must also set an example for proper conduct and performance 
for their subordinates. 

C.   Supervisors must identify and deal with misconduct and unacceptable 

performance as they occur. 

D.  Supervisors must document problems as they occur and follow up with 

COREs to ensure they understand the seriousness of their behavior and/or 
performance deficiencies. Documentation does not have to be lengthy. It can 
be a brief summary of key facts and issues, with names, dates and times that 
the incident(s) occurred. This documentation must be created in a timely 
manner and preserved for potential litigation and may be subject to discovery.  

E.  Supervisors should immediately contact their servicing Employee Relations 

Specialist when misconduct or performance issues occur to obtain advice and 
guidance before taking any official action. If this issue involves misconduct, 
supervisors must report the matter as required by FD 123-19, paragraph III.D.  

F.  When making a determination of lack of fitness to encumber a FEMA position, 
or that the CORE’s security clearance is being suspended or revoked under 
DHS Instruction 121-01-007, OCSO shall immediately notify Employee 
Relations. 

11-2.  Addressing Misconduct 

A.  Misconduct must be reported to FEMA HQ in accordance with FD 123-19, 

Administrative Investigations Directive (AID), and, depending on the status of 
the CORE and the alleged misconduct, to the DHS OIG. It can be difficult to 
determine whether a CORE’s actions constitute misconduct or poor 
performance, or whether suspected misconduct triggers the requirements to 
report the suspected misconduct to DHS OIG or the AID Committee. As such, 
consultation with OCCHCO is critical to determining the proper course of 
action. The Employee Relations Specialist will recommend the appropriate 
option and provide the required documentation to the manager for issuance to 
the CORE. FD 123-19 and its accompanying Manual, FM 123-19-1, provide 
procedures for reporting misconduct and investigating it prior to determining if 
disciplinary action for any substantiated misconduct is to be recommended. 

B.  Options to Address Misconduct 

1.  Counseling. A counsel is an informal verbal advisement by a supervisor 
to a CORE of misconduct that must be corrected, yet which avoids any 
lasting adverse effect on a CORE’s personnel record. The purpose of 
counseling is to correct misconduct problems soon after they occur in 

59 

 
 
order to prevent the need for formal discipline. Counseling is an 
appropriate response to minor misconduct when the CORE has a 
generally good record, with no prior instances of misconduct, and is 
committed to correcting the problem. Documentation is not required; 
however, a follow-up e-mail recounting the conversation entitled 
“Discussion dated XX” can be provided to the CORE and is strongly 
recommended. At a minimum the supervisor shall send an email to 
himself or herself to document the content of the conversation. Counseling 
can be used to demonstrate that the CORE was put on notice about the 
problem and knew of the potential for a harsh penalty if the problem 
continued. A memorandum documenting the counseling is not placed in 
the CORE’s Official Personnel Folder (OPF). 

2.   Reprimand. A written reprimand is the lowest level of formal discipline 
addressed to the CORE and signed by the immediate supervisor (or 
higher level supervisor in the chain of command). Depending on the 
severity of the misconduct, it may be appropriate for a first offense of 
misconduct, when written formal discipline is necessary or, when verbal 
counseling has been ineffective in correcting misconduct. The reprimand 
should include, as a minimum, the following information: 

i.  Reference previous counseling or other action that was relied on to 

support the action (if any); 

ii.  Advise the CORE of any applicable appeal rights, such as the right to 
file an appeal with the next higher level supervisor within five calendar 
days after receipt of the reprimand; 

iii.  Advise the CORE of the potential negative consequences of future 

misconduct; 

iv.  Advise the CORE of Employee Assistance Program (EAP) services 

available to assist with any work-related or personal concerns that may 
have an impact on performance and/or behavior at work; 

v.  Inform the CORE of the Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) Program 
and of his or her right to seek counseling with an EEO advisor if he or 
she believes the reprimand is based on a prohibited factor; 

vi.  State whether a copy of the reprimand will be placed in the CORE’s 

OPF, which may be for a period not to exceed 3 years; 

vii. Identify the servicing Employee Relations Specialist to contact for 

questions concerning the reprimand; and  

viii. Provide a signature line upon which the CORE will acknowledge 

receipt of the notice of reprimand. 

3.  Suspension. A suspension temporarily removes the CORE from the 

performance of duties without pay for a specified period, and is recorded 
in the CORE’s official personnel record. A notice of suspension is a 
memorandum on FEMA letterhead, addressed to the CORE, and signed 

60 

 
by the immediate supervisor (or higher level supervisor in the chain of 
command. 

i. 

 The supervisor of record forwards a copy of the notice (signed and 
dated by the supervisor) and the SF-52 to the Employee Relations 
Specialist. The Specialist codes the SF-52 and forwards it to the 
OCCHCO for processing. 

ii.   The notice of a suspension should include, as a minimum, the 

following information: 

a.  Identify the specific charge(s), supporting information, regulations 

or policies violated; 

b.  Identify the effective date of the action; 

c.  Advise the CORE of any applicable appeal rights, such as the right 
to appeal the suspension to the next-higher level supervisor within 
five calendar days of receipt of the notice, and of the CORE’s right 
to file a grievance under any applicable collective bargaining 
agreement; 

d.  Inform the CORE of his or her right to seek counseling with an EEO 

advisor if he or she believes the suspension is based on a 
prohibited factor; 

e.  Advise the CORE how to contact the EAP to assist with any work-
related or personal concerns that may have an impact on the 
CORE’s conduct at work; 

f.  Provide the name and telephone number of the servicing Employee 
Relations Specialist whom the CORE may contact for questions; 
and 

g.  Provide a signature line upon which the CORE will acknowledge 

receipt of the notice of suspension. 

4.  Removal from Federal Service. A removal from federal service is 

recorded in the CORE’s personnel record, and is the most severe form of 
discipline available to a manager. Removal may be appropriate when the 
facts and supporting information cause the supervisor to conclude that the 
CORE has demonstrated an unwillingness or refusal to conform to 
acceptable standards of conduct, a lesser penalty would not deter future 
misconduct, or there is little probability of the CORE’s rehabilitation.  

i.  A notice of removal is a memorandum on FEMA Letterhead addressed 
to the CORE from the immediate supervisor (or higher level supervisor 
in the chain of command). The notice should include the same items 
identified in section 11-2.B.3.ii. (Content of a suspension notice). 

ii.  The CORE’s immediate supervisor, or any higher-level supervisor in 

the CORE’s chain of command, should give the notice to the CORE at 
or before the effective date of the notice and request that the CORE 

61 

 
acknowledge receipt at the bottom of the last page of the notice. If the 
CORE refuses to sign the notice acknowledging receipt, the supervisor 
should place a note on the last page to indicate that the notice was 
given to the CORE and the CORE refused to acknowledge receipt. 
Failure to acknowledge receipt has no impact on implementation of the 
decision. 

5.  Removal Based on a Determination of Lack of Fitness for a FEMA 
Position. All COREs must meet fitness standards established in DHS 
Instruction 121-01-007. 

i.  OCSO has the authority to determine a CORE’s fitness, based on a 
background investigation at the time of entry on duty and every five 
years thereafter (or more frequently as circumstances warrant). 

ii.  When OCSO has determined that a CORE does not meet the fitness 
standard, in accordance with the procedures in DHS Instruction 121-
01-007, OCSO shall notify OCCHCO/Employee Relations, which shall 
coordinate with the CORE’s supervisor and OCSO to deny the CORE 
unescorted access to DHS/FEMA facilities. In addition, DHS Sensitive 
Systems Policy Directive 4300A requires that DHS employees have a 
favorably adjudicated background investigation to be granted access to 
DHS Information Technology systems. Therefore, COREs who do not 
meet the fitness standard are normally required to turn in their FEMA 
equipment (e.g., laptop, Blackberry, etc.) and are placed on non-duty, 
non-pay status. The CORE may request to use any available accrued 
leave during this period. 

iii.  With the concurrence of OCCHCO/Employee Relations and the Office 
of Chief Counsel, the supervisor of record issues a removal decision to 
a CORE under his or her supervision deemed unfit to encumber a 
FEMA position. The notice should include the same items identified in 
section 11-2.B.3.ii. (content of a suspension notice).  

iv.  The removal decision shall include the right to appeal within five 

calendar days after the removal is effective. Appeals from removal 
decisions are decided by the Associate or Deputy Associate 
Administrator, Mission Support. 

6.  Recovery of Government Equipment. Supervisors shall collect all 
government equipment prior to the effective date of the removal. 

11-3.  Addressing Poor Performance 

CORE supervisors and managers should consult FM 255-1-1, Employee 
Performance Management Program, for more information on dealing with poor 
performance. Most performance problems can be resolved through effective 
communication between the supervisor and CORE. The supervisor should, at a 
minimum, take the following steps: 

62 

 
 
A.  Discuss performance deficiencies with any CORE whose performance is 

substandard. This discussion provides the supervisor the opportunity to clarify 
job expectations, and to identify performance deficiencies. It provides the 
CORE with clear direction as to what he or she needs to do to improve his or 
her performance to an acceptable level. The supervisor should document the 
discussion and provide the CORE with a copy of the documentation to 
prevent misunderstandings, or mischaracterization of the discussion.  

B.  Monitor the CORE’s performance following the discussion, and document the 

CORE’s progress toward improving his or her performance. 

C.  The supervisor must discuss the CORE’s performance deficiencies with the 
Employee Relations Specialist for guidance on (1) whether to remove a 
CORE for substandard performance immediately or (2) to provide the CORE 
time to demonstrate improvement, and if so, the length of time to do so. A 
“performance expectations” memorandum is a helpful tool that the supervisor 
can issue to the CORE. The Employee Relations Specialist will assist the 
supervisor with drafting any correspondence regarding performance 
problems. The supervisor will provide the Specialist with a signed and dated 
copy of the final document. The supervisor must document the deficiencies 
with memoranda, emails, work products and any other documentation that 
demonstrates the deficiencies. COREs are not placed on formal Performance 
Improvement Plans (PIPs). 

D.  Removal from Federal Service. 

1.  A removal from federal service is recorded in the CORE’s personnel 

record, and is the most severe form of discipline available to a manager. A 
notice of removal is a memorandum on FEMA Letterhead addressed to 
the CORE from the immediate supervisor (or higher level supervisor in the 
chain of command). 

2.  The notice should include the same items identified in section 11-2.B.3.ii 

(content of a suspension notice). 

3.  The CORE’s immediate supervisor, or any higher-level supervisor in the 

CORE’s chain of command, must give the notice to the CORE at or before 
the effective date of the notice and request that the CORE acknowledge 
receipt at the bottom of the last page of the notice. If the CORE refuses to 
sign the notice acknowledging receipt, the supervisor should place a note 
on the last page to indicate that the notice was given to the CORE and the 
CORE refused to acknowledge receipt. Failure to acknowledge receipt 
has no impact on implementation of the decision. 

E.  In rare circumstances, the supervisor may initiate a reassignment to another 
position in a lower pay band or IC pay grade, whichever is applicable, in lieu 
of removal, to address poor performance after receiving concurrence from the 
Employee Relations Specialist and the Office of Chief Counsel. In such 
circumstances, the CORE’s rate of pay will be reduced in accordance with 
Chapters 5 and 6. 

63 

 
11-4.  Deployment Scenarios 

COREs may be assigned to perform incident management and incident support 
duties based on the operational needs of FEMA and subject to the policies 
contained within FD 010-8, FEMA Incident Workforce Deployment. During 
deployment, supervisors of record receive feedback on the performance of 
COREs during deployments from the CORE’s temporary duty supervisors. 
Temporary duty supervisors provide day-to-day supervision of the performance 
of deployed COREs. 

A.  Temporary duty supervisors must consult with the supervisor of record and  

OCCHCO/Employee Relations Branch when they encounter poor 
performance, and provide all documents to the supervisor of record. 

B.   Temporary duty supervisors who become aware of allegations of misconduct 
shall notify the supervisor of record of the allegation. The supervisor of record 
shall consult with OCCHCO/Employee Relations before initiating disciplinary 
action. The supervisor of record will notify the temporary duty supervisor of 
any impending disciplinary action. In all cases in which misconduct is alleged, 
the Employee Relations Branch shall provide advice to the Federal 
Coordinating Officer (FCO) and the supervisor of record as to the propriety of 
the following options: 

1.  Releasing the CORE from the deployment into a non-duty, non-pay status; 

2.  Releasing the CORE and returning him or her to the official duty station, or  

3.  Keeping the CORE deployed pending completion of any needed 

investigation or issuance of disciplinary action. 

C.  If the supervisor of record and FCO disagree whether to demobilize the 

CORE, the issue will be resolved by the Associate Administrator of Response 
and Recovery. 

11-5.  Arrest, Indictment, and other Allegations of Misconduct 

A.  FEMA may receive information that a CORE has been arrested, indicted for a 

crime, used an illegal drug, or has allegedly committed other serious 
misconduct. Supervisors may learn of this information in a variety of ways, 
including the CORE’s self-report or via other employees, the Office of the 
Chief Security Office (OCSO), or press reports. Upon receipt of such 
information, the supervisor of record, FCO, or temporary duty supervisor shall 
contact Employee Relations for guidance. 

B.  If the CORE is incarcerated or otherwise unable to come to work, the 

supervisor must first address the leave status. COREs may use available 
leave, if requested and approved by the supervisor. If the request is denied, 
the CORE shall be placed in a non-duty, non-pay status. The supervisor is 
not obligated to approve a leave request submitted by the CORE. 

64 

 
 
 
C.  If the CORE is available for duty following arrest, or, if not arrested, but is 
under investigation for alleged misconduct, the following factors must be 
considered in determining whether the CORE shall be permitted to return to 
duty pending resolution of the criminal action or other serious misconduct: 

1.  If the CORE has a security clearance, OCSO, Personnel Security Division 

(PSD), may suspend a CORE’s security clearance upon receipt of 
adverse information, such as an arrest or indictment. If PSD suspends the 
CORE’s clearance, or revokes it, PSD shall notify ER. Normally, COREs 
would be placed in non-duty, non-pay status until a recommendation on 
removal can be made by ER to the supervisor of record. 

2.  For COREs without security clearances, OCSO must determine if the 

CORE is fit for continued employment. Thus, until OCSO has rendered a 
determination on the CORE’s fitness, the supervisor of record must 
determine whether the CORE should be allowed to continue to work 
(including telework), be placed in a non-duty, non-pay status or be 
terminated pending the outcome of the criminal case, considering the 
following factors after consultation with ER, OCC’s Personnel Law Branch, 
and OCSO: 

i.  What is the nature of the offense or other serious misconduct? The 
more serious the offense, the more likely that the CORE should not 
return to duty. 

ii.  What evidence is there as to the commission of the offense? The lack 
of corroboration or confession especially with a minor offense, may 
weigh in favor of the CORE’s retention on duty. 

iii.  Does the known evidence suggest that the CORE is a physical or 

logical security risk? 

iv.  Impact on the Mission: Are there other factors that indicate that the 

mission will be adversely affected if the CORE is returned to duty, such 
as notoriety? Is the offense known, causing perceived damage to a 
Directorate’s, Office’s, or JFO’s ability to conduct business or its 
credibility due to the CORE’s continued presence? 

3.  Authority to return the CORE to duty pending resolution of criminal 

matters: After consultation with ER, and subject to approval, if required, by 
the Office of Inspector General: 

i.  For COREs who are deployed, the FCO shall make the final decision 
as to whether the CORE shall remain at the JFO, after consultation 
with the supervisor of record (see section 11-4 for resolution of 
disputes on this matter between FCO and the supervisor of record). 

ii.  For COREs at their official duty station, the supervisor of record shall 
make the final decision as to whether the CORE shall return to duty. 

65 

 
 
11-6.  The Appeal Process 

A CORE who wishes to appeal a reprimand, suspension, or removal decision 
may do so in writing to his or her second level supervisor no later than 5:00 p.m. 
(the local time of the second level supervisor) on the fifth calendar day following 
the effective date of the disciplinary action. COREs included within collective 
bargaining units must follow the procedures for that unit. Oral appeals are not 
permitted. This appeal process is not applicable to non-disciplinary actions, such 
as right-sizing, demobilization, or the expiration of appointments. 

A.  The CORE may provide a narrative and any documentation that he or she 

considers relevant for the second level supervisor to consider prior to issuing 
his or her final decision. 

B.  The second level supervisor may gather additional documents that he or she 
deems necessary to make a final decision. The second level supervisor 
should complete any additional investigation within five working days of the 
receipt of a timely appeal and issue a decision within five working days after 
finishing an investigation. 

C.  The Employee Relations Specialist will review the written decision drafted by 
the second level supervisor prior to its issuance to the CORE. Additionally, 
the Employee Relations Specialist will gather and preserve any and all 
additional documents acquired by the second level supervisor to issue the 
final decision and the final decision itself. 

11-7.  Allegations of Discrimination 

If a CORE alleges discrimination to his or her supervisor, the CORE must be 
referred to the Office of Equal Rights for appropriate guidance on the EEO 
complaint process. The supervisor may contact the Office of Chief Counsel’s 
Personnel Law Branch with any questions concerning the EEO process. 

11-8.  Allegations of Fraud, Waste, Abuse, and Mismanagement 

Supervisors must not ignore allegations of fraud, waste, abuse, or 
mismanagement, and must take steps to inquire into the allegations or refer them 
to appropriate management officials for investigation. Allegations of misconduct 
against COREs at the IC-15 or equivalent level or higher must be referred to the 
Office of Inspector General (ref: DHS Management Directive 0810.1) for 
investigation. 

66 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 12:  RIGHTSIZING 

12-1.  General 

A.  COREs receive temporary appointments that do not confer eligibility or 

priority consideration for permanent appointment. They may be removed from 
Federal service at any time for poor performance, misconduct, reduction in 
work, or for other agency mission needs, so long as adequate documentation 
exists to justify the removal, and are not subject to protection afforded by 
reduction-in-force provisions or reemployment rights established under any 
statutory or regulatory provision.  

B.  When FEMA requires reductions in staff levels in one or more functional 

areas due to a lack of work or funding, FEMA may conduct a rightsizing of its 
CORE workforce. A rightsizing may occur when an Office or Directorate 
anticipates needing fewer positions through the annual workload analysis and 
staffing plan process, or if an immediate need to reduce positions or workload 
is realized between annual workload analyses. 

C.  Rightsizing results in termination of appointment prior to the expiration date of 
an appointment, unless the CORE is selected for or is reassigned to another 
vacant position in FEMA. 

D.  Rightsizing procedures should not be used to remove CORE employees due 

to poor performance or misconduct.  

E.  A Rightsizing does not occur when FEMA declines to renew a CORE’s 

appointment at the end of a CORE’s appointment term. 

F.  Program Areas shall be clearly defined, with appropriate justification, in the 

Plan. The Plan shall be in writing and approved by OCCHCO prior to 
implementation.  

12-2.  Rightsizing Plan 

A.  The second level supervisor, in coordination with OCCHCO, develops a 

Rightsizing Plan to affect the rightsizing procedures described in this Chapter 
that will impact the COREs under his or her supervisory authority. The Plan 
shall be in writing and approved by OCCHCO prior to implementation. 

B.  Based on the Office or Directorate’s most recent workload analysis and 

staffing plan, the second level supervisor will identify the activities that will 
cease to be performed or require an adjustment in the amount of time for 
performance. 

C.  Using this adjusted workload analysis, the supervisor or manager will develop 
a revised Staffing Plan for the positions under his or her authority that will 
propose the number of CORE positions by title, series, grade, and duty 
station that will continue to be needed. The remaining positions will be 
identified for rightsizing. 

67 

 
 
D.  The Rightsizing Plan will consist of the updated staffing plan, any Functional 

Area SMEs identified for retention (see section 12-4.B.), the proposed 
timeline for providing the general and specific notices of rightsizing to the 
affected COREs, and the proposed effective date of the rightsizing. 

12-3.  Notice 

The second level supervisor will issue both general and specific notice of 
upcoming rightsizing efforts. 

A.  General Advance Notice. COREs will be given a 30 calendar day advance 
official notification concerning decisions which may result in their being 
affected by a rightsizing effort. This notification will be in writing and will 
include: the reasons for the rightsizing effort, such as lack of work or funds, 
reorganization, or a realignment of functions; and, whom to contact about 
assistance available for affected employees. 

B.   Specific Notice. Specific written notice of separation will be issued to 

individual affected COREs prior to the proposed date of their release.  
FEMA’s goal is to provide notice no less than 30 calendar days from their 
date of release unless extenuating circumstances dictate a shorter notice 
period.  

12-4.  Retention Criteria 

Upon determining that rightsizing procedures are required, the second level 
supervisor, in consultation with OCCHCO, shall utilize the following criteria to 
determine the order in which COREs will be released. An incumbent will only be 
compared to other incumbents under the supervision of that second level 
supervisor. 

A.  Position. Identify (1) the affected area; (2) the existing positions staffing that 
area; and (3) pay levels within each position. Each position is reviewed and 
listed by pay and location, and positions are identified for retention based on 
lack of work or funds, reorganization, or a realignment of functions. The 
determination as to the number of needed positions to staff the reduced 
workforce must be documented in the Rightsizing Plan. 

Example. In this example, the program area is identified as “Applicant 
Services” and the existing positions are “Applicant Services Specialists.” 
There are currently 10 IC-12s, 15 IC-11s, and 15 IC-9s Applicant Services 
Specialist positions. The remaining work only requires 3 IC-12s, 10 IC-11s, 
and no IC-9s Applicant Services Specialists.11 Therefore, 7 IC-12s, 5 IC-11s, 
and all IC-9s will be released. Consequently, the second level supervisor 
must examine the incumbent IC-12s and IC-11s to determine who will fill the 

11 For this example, substitute the pay band numbers for grade level if the COREs with positions 
targeted for rightsizing are paid via an administratively-determined pay scale utilizing pay bands. 

68 

 
 
 
                                                           
remaining positions utilizing the following retention criteria. OCCHCO must 
approve this Plan prior to implementation. 

3 – Applicant 
Services 
Specialists, IC-
12 
10 – Applicant 
Services 
Specialist, IC-11 

Current Staffing  Needed  
10 – Applicant 
Services 
Specialists, IC-
12 
15 – Applicant 
Services 
Specialists, IC-
11 
15 – Applicant 
Service 
Specialists, IC-9 

0 – Applicant 
Services 
Specialists, IC-9 

Release 
7 – Applicant 
Services 
Specialists, IC-
12 
5 – Applicant 
Services 
Specialists, IC-
11 
15 –Applicant 
Services 
Specialists IC-9 

Remaining 
3 – Applicant 
Services 
Specialists, IC-
12 
10 – Applicant 
Services 
Specialists, IC-
11 
0 – Applicant 
Services 
Specialists, IC-9 

B.  Functional Area SME. To ensure accomplishment of mission objectives, the 
supervisor of a functional area subject to rightsizing procedures may identify 
one SME from the supervisor’s functional area that should be excluded from 
rightsizing procedures because of the SME’s subject matter expertise. Any 
request for a SME’s exclusion from rightsizing must be accompanied by a 
justification that establishes that a need exists for this SME position, and that 
the requested employee is most qualified for the SME position. This request 
must be approved by the supervisor’s chain of command with the final 
concurrence of the Head of the Office or Directorate, who will then inform 
OCCHCO of the SME designation and transmit to OCCHCO all documents 
justifying his or her selection. OCCHCO must review and approve the SME 
designation as part of the review of the Rightsizing Plan. A SME who is 
thereafter reassigned to a different functional area will lose his or her SME 
designation, thereby losing his or her exemption from rightsizing procedures. 

C.  Performance Evaluation. The second level supervisor will provide to 

OCCHCO the summary rating level of all COREs in positions that must be 
rightsized, based on their most recent annual performance appraisals. 
Incumbents will be released in inverse order of performance rating (lowest to 
highest). Normally, incumbents with summary rating levels of Achieved 
Excellence (or equivalent) will be excluded from release unless the total 
number of positions that must be released exceeds the number of incumbents 
who received a summary rating below Achieved Excellence (or equivalent).   

D.  Service Computation Date (SCD). If reviewing the performance evaluations 
of all COREs in positions that must be rightsized has not distinguished the 
incumbents for release from those who will be excluded from release for the 
current round of rightsizing, OCCHCO shall further review incumbents by 
SCD and shall identify those with the most recent SCDs for release.  

E.  Ties.  The official who would normally make the selection for the position from 

which the CORE is being released will determine, on the basis of 

69 

 
 
 
qualifications and competencies for the specific position, which employee(s) 
will be retained when two or more employees have identical service 
computation dates. The rationale for retention versus removal must be 
documented with the specific reasons for each decision. OCCHCO must 
review and approve the stated rationale. 

F.  Recovery Office Closure. 

1.  Some COREs will remain in their positions until the closure of the 

Recovery Office. 

2.  Upon the closure of the Recovery Office, the remaining COREs must have 

applied and been selected for a vacant FEMA position or they will be 
released from their employment with FEMA, using the notice procedures 
above. 

12-5.  Transitional Options for Released COREs 

CORE staff identified for release will not be automatically reassigned directly into 
vacant positions elsewhere in FEMA and must apply and be appointed through 
the hiring procedures identified in this Manual. COREs will be released from their 
current appointments for lack of work if, by the date of their release, they have 
not been selected for another vacant position within FEMA. The Director of the 
Recovery Office or the Head of the Office or Directorate may assist COREs 
identified for release with career transition, as appropriate, by arranging for 
assistance with resume writing and interview preparation. 

70 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 13:  ABSENCE AND LEAVE 

13-1.  Absence and Leave Policy 

FEMA administratively applies FM 3300.3, FEMA Absence and Leave Policy to 
COREs, with the exception of CORE-Is, whose absence and leave policies are 
governed by FD 010-7, Incident Management Assistance Team (IMAT) Program 
Directive.  

71 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 14:  TRAINING AND ETHICS 

14-1.  Training Provisions 

A.  The CORE and his or her supervisor of record share the responsibility for 

ensuring the CORE’s professional development. 

B.  OCCHCO, Employee Development Division, is responsible for drafting 

guidance on various topics, including but not limited to, continuing service 
agreements relating participation in employee development programs, 
supervisory training, and individual and executive development plans. 

C.  A CORE may be temporarily placed on a rotational assignment as part of a 
professional development program. In such circumstances, the duties and 
responsibilities performed by the CORE must be authorized under the 
Stafford Act. A CORE may be placed on a rotational assignment for up to 120 
days that may be renewed for one additional 120 day period. As the CORE 
IMAT program maintains its own professional development program, CORE 
IMATs are not eligible for rotational assignments. 

D.  Eligibility for training programs for a CORE paid via the grades and steps 

system is determined by the applicable grade and years of service 
requirement. Eligibility for training programs for a CORE paid via the pay 
band system is determined by comparing the current salary level of the 
CORE to the salary range of the GS levels eligible for the training program 
and the years of service requirement. The CORE will be eligible for a training 
program if the CORE’s salary is within the salary range of the GS employees 
eligible for the training and satisfying the years of service requirement. 

E.  IM COREs are eligible to participate in applicable leadership development 
programs so long as the training program does not have an impact on 
mission requirements. If an IM CORE is directed to deploy during a training 
program the CORE must deploy and may not finish the training program. 

F.  COREs participating in a leadership development program will be required to 
sign and comply with the terms of a three year Continuing Service Agreement 
(CSA). See Chapter 15, Continuing Service Agreements, for more 
information. 

14-2.  Ethics Requirements  

A.  All COREs are subject to the federal ethics laws and regulations, including 

the criminal conflict of interest statutes, the Standards of Ethical Conduct for 
Employees of the Executive Branch, and any supplemental ethics regulations 
promulgated by DHS. 

1.  Federal ethics laws and regulations apply to COREs at all times and may 

affect a CORE’s ability to seek and enter into outside employment. 

2.  A CORE’s outside employment may also create a real or apparent conflict 

of interest with his or her FEMA duties. 

72 

 
 
3.  COREs must be informed of these rules and regulations prior to hiring. 

B.  All COREs shall receive training in fraud detection and prevention, equal 

rights, privacy, and security. 

C.  All COREs must complete Initial Ethics Orientation provided by OCC Ethics 

within 90 days of their date of entry, in accordance with 5 C.F.R. § 2638.703. 

D.  Confidential financial disclosure filers must complete one hour of annual 

ethics training per calendar year, as required by 5 C.F.R. § 2638.705.  All 
other COREs must complete annual ethics training per FEMA policy. 

E.  All annual ethics training is provided by OCC Ethics. 

73 

 
 
 
CHAPTER 15:  CONTINUING SERVICE AGREEMENTS 

15-1.  Service Agreement 

A.  An applicant or CORE who receives a recruitment, relocation, or retention 

incentive is required to sign a two-year CSA prior to receiving the incentive. 
The Selecting Official or supervisor of record will preserve a signed copy of 
the service agreement and transmit a copy to OCCHCO. 

B.  A CORE participating in a leadership development program will be required to 

sign a three-year CSA. 

C.  A CORE must fulfill the terms of the CSA, including when the appointment is 

renewed for another appointment period. 

15-2.  Terminations of a CSA 

A.  If a CORE voluntarily separates from FEMA prior to completing the service 
obligation period, to begin employment with DHS Headquarters or another 
DHS Component, the CORE must give his or her supervisor of record at least 
30 days advance notice in writing, during which time the supervisor shall 
notify OCCHCO to transfer the remaining service obligation to the gaining 
agency. If the CORE separates from the Federal service or begins 
employment with another Federal agency, the CORE will be indebted to 
FEMA for the remaining service period. 

B.  A CORE who is demoted, removed from Federal service for misconduct or 
poor performance, or receives a rating of record lower than Achieved 
Expectations or equivalent, before fulfilling the terms of a CSA will be 
indebted to the Federal Government for the remaining service period.  

C.  Repayment is not required when a CORE is involuntarily separated for 
reasons other than misconduct or poor performance, or when the 
circumstances are otherwise beyond the CORE’s control. 

D.  A CSA may be unilaterally terminated by the head of an Office or Directorate 
based solely on management needs. Examples of discretionary removals 
include, but are not limited to, rightsizings or insufficient funds to continue 
planned payments. When a removal is based on management needs, the 
employee is entitled to all payments attributable to completed service and to 
retain any portion of a payment received that is attributable to uncompleted 
service. 

15-3.  Debt Recovery 

A.  When reimbursement is required, the repayment amount will be reduced on a 

pro rata basis for the percentage of completion of the obligated service 
period. 

B.  If a CORE’s appointment is not renewed, and the CORE is not appointed to a 

different position within FEMA, recovery is waived. 

74 

 
 
 
C.  An indebted CORE may request a waiver of any debt relating to a CSA to his 
or her Office or Directorate head. The Officer or Directorate head must send 
the request along with his or her recommendation through OCCHCO to the 
Administrator, who will render a written decision. Waivers in whole or in part 
will be rare and will be based on a determination that the recovery would be 
against equity and good conscience, or against the public interest. 

75 

 
FEMA Manual 3000.3 

July 31, 2000 

I. 

BACKGROUND 

"Telework” is a workplace arrangement that provides employees the opportunity to 
perform his/her duties at alternate work sites (e.g., satellite locations, other FEMA 
locations, and employee’s residences) during an agreed-upon portion of his/her 
workweek.  Telework, also known as telecommuting, flexible workplace, flexiplace, and 
work-at-home, refers to paid employment away from an employee’s official duty station. 

The flexible workplace environment provides a means of responding to rapidly 
changing factors that are impacting today's workforce—demographic, societal and 
technological—and has proven effective in increasing worker productivity, reducing 
employee turnover and absenteeism, and responding to sociological and 
environmental issues.  Telework programs already exist in both the public and 
private sectors and show positive results.  

In his memorandum on Expanding Family-Friendly Work Arrangements in the Executive 
Branch dated July 11, 1994, President Clinton directed all Federal agencies “ . . . to 
establish a program to encourage and support the expansion of flexible family friendly 
work arrangements, . . .telecommuting and satellite work conditions including 
telecommuting . . .".  The National Partnership for Reinventing Government encourages 
greater use of Telework to make the Federal workplace more efficient. 

The innovative scheduling of work locations and scheduling of work hours can 
measurably improve the conduct of the public's business and Agency's mission.  
Telework leads to improved employee morale, reduced commuting costs, and increased 
employee productivity.  This, in turn, improves recruiting and retention of valued 
employees while shortening, or even eliminating, commuter trips, and thus traffic 
congestion and pollution.  Remember employers cannot attract, retain, and motivate an 
effective work force if they are not responsive to quality of life work issues.  

This guidance is the foundation for a Telework Program that will benefit FEMA and its 
employees. 

II. 

DEFINITIONS 

“What is Telework?”  Telework is a workplace arrangement that provides employees the 
opportunity to perform his/her duties at alternate work sites.  Telework is not a full-time 
arrangement and it does not involve sending people home and never seeing them.  
Teleworkers communicate with supervisors, co-workers, clients, and vendors via phone, 
fax, or e-mail on days when they are not in the office. 

Telework is not an employee right or entitlement, but an alternative work arrangement 
or work option mutually agreed upon by the employee, the supervisor and the Agency 
for the primary purpose of increasing productivity.  The arrangement can be terminated 
at any time for any reason by any of the parties involved. 

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
FEMA Manual 3000.3 

July 31, 2000 

A.  Episodic: 

Recognizing that certain projects may be amenable to being performed at 
alternate work sites rather than in an office setting, the Telework Program is 
available on an ad hoc or episodic basis for short periods of time to complete all 
or discrete portions of projects.  Episodic work agreements are of a temporary, 
project-based nature and therefore, should not be in place for extended periods 
of time.  Generally, Episodic work agreements should be for a period of one to 
two weeks at the most, the time period should be determined at the discretion of 
the supervisor.  The supervisor may also require periodic returns to the regular 
duty station on a regular basis during the period of this form of Telework. 

B.  Medical:  

FEMA has permitted certain employees with a debilitating illness or health 
condition to work at an alternate work site on a full or part-time basis, where 
supported by documentation from the employee’s physician.  FEMA 
management will continue to provide teleworking options to enable employees to 
remain active and productive while faced with a medical situation or condition. 

This alternative has also been extended to severely disabled employees and 
employees who for a limited time, may be required to care for an ill child or 
relative where no other reasonable alternative is available.  All requests must be 
supported by medical documentation. 

C.  Regular (The Regular System of Telework will continue to be tested in a pilot 
format.  Any reference to Regular Telework in this document refers to the 
continuing FEMA Pilot Program.):  

Employees will volunteer to be regularly scheduled to work up to three non-
consecutive days per week at an alternate work site, generally at another FEMA 
facility or at the employee’s home.  It is at the manager’s discretion whether an 
employee on a Telework schedule may participate in other workplace scheduling 
alternatives.  Managers should consider all scheduling aspects of the respective 
office (e.g. Flexitour, and compressed work schedule [CWS]).  Sufficient staffing 
of the office is of primary importance.  In making a regular Telework decision, 
supervisors must consider the following: 

•= Workflow; 

•= Historical frequency of unanticipated actions and demands in the work 

unit; 

•=

Impact on non-regular Telework employees at the official duty station; 
and,  

2

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FEMA Manual 3000.3 

July 31, 2000 

•= The most efficient ways to achieve work unit effectiveness. 

D.  Teleworker: 

An employee found eligible for participation in one of the forms of Telework; 
works at an alternate work site; and has developed an approved Telework 
agreement by the supervisory chain. 

E.  Eligible Employees: 

An employee in a job with tasks identified by the employee’s supervisor as being 
suitable for telework.  Employees must meet program eligibility requirements. 

F.  Official Duty Station:  

The employee’s official duty station of record. 

G.  Alternate Work Site:  

A work site other than the employee’s official duty station.  The alternate site may 
include the employee’s home, a satellite office or a Telework center. 

H.  Telework Center: 

A facility that offers office-like workstations and electronic equipment that may 
house Telework employees. 

III. 

SCOPE 

This Telework policy applies only to permanent full-time, CORE, and part-time FEMA 
employees.  Other disaster employees are not eligible for Telework.  Senior Executive 
Service (SES) employees, Office and Division Directors, Branch Chiefs, and Team 
Leaders may be eligible for episodic or medical Telework only.  

IV.  GUIDELINES 

A.  Employee Participation  

Telework is targeted to eligible employees whose positions have tasks that lend 
themselves to being performed away from the official duty station for at least a 
portion of the time.  Generally, any occupation/job involving portable work can be 
considered for inclusion in the program as long as the work does not present a 
security risk to the agency. 

3

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FEMA Manual 3000.3 

July 31, 2000 

Participation is voluntary and requires supervisor approval.  Supervisors and/or 
employees participating in the program may withdraw from the program after 
providing sufficient advance notice (24 hours is generally expected; every effort 
should be made to provide the teleworker with sufficient notice) to afford 
management and employees adequate time to plan for reversions back to a 
regular work environment (official duty station) and schedule.  Eligible 
employees, those approved for a Telework arrangement, may be recalled by 
his/her supervisor to the official duty station when warranted by work 
requirements, disaster activity, or failure to comply with Telework program 
requirements.  Employees may also be called back due to office staffing needs, 
such as in times of large-scale absences due to holidays, flu epidemics and 
office overload.  The absence of a Teleworker from their official duty station 
should not affect the business of that office or the amount of work others are 
called upon to perform.  Employees considering application should seriously 
consider the program requirements and his/her commitment to make the 
teleworking arrangement successful. 

B.  Position Criteria 

The nature of the work must be suitable for teleworking.  Whether work is 
suitable for Telework depends generally on whether all aspects of producing the 
finished product or outcome can be efficiently and effectively carried out at the 
alternate work site.  Work suitability does not depend on an employee’s position, 
title, type of appointment, or work schedule. 

When determining whether a position, function, or project may be suitable for 
Telework, consideration should be given to the following factors: 

1.  Work activities should be portable and can be performed effectively outside 
the office.  Examples of this would be thinking, writing, data analysis, and 
project or case review. 

2.  Job tasks should be easily quantifiable or primarily project oriented.  

Examples might be writing decisions or reports. 

3.  An employee’s participation in the Telework Program should not adversely 
affect the performance of other employees and should not place a burden 
on the staff remaining in the office. 

4.  Contact with other employees and customers can be scheduled in advance.  
If the job requires extensive face-to-face contact with the supervisor, other 
employees, customers, or the general public, the job may not be suitable for 
Telework. 

5.  Materials and data needed to carry out Telework tasks must not present a 
security risk or breach of confidentiality to the agency (e.g. personnel or 
national security documents).  The integrity and confidentiality of any 

4

 
 
 
 
 
 
FEMA Manual 3000.3 

July 31, 2000 

document removed from the agency must be assured.  If the tasks require 
frequent access to materials that cannot be removed from the regular office, 
those tasks are not suitable for Telework.   

6.  The technology needed to perform the job off-site must be available at the 
off-site location.  The employee's sponsoring organization cannot provide 
any specific facilities or equipment that are necessary to perform the job.  
This includes Internet Service Provider (ISP) fees and telephone service 
costs.  The Agency will, however, provide a computer, if one is available, for 
work-at-home.  Expenses for any modifications to FEMA-owned equipment 
must be borne by the employee or his/her sponsoring organization (e.g. 
addition of a modem for e-mail/Internet access).    

C.  Eligibility Requirements 

Approval to participate in a Regular Telework Pilot arrangement will (under the 
pilot guidelines) be granted on a case-by-case basis, using the selection process.  
Eligible employees must have received his/her supervisor’s approval prior to any 
program participation at any level. Supervisors will accept applications from all 
interested candidates who meet the basic eligibility requirements listed below: 

Eligibility Requirements for the Regular Telework Pilot Program 

The following criteria must be met before an employee can participate in the 
Regular Telework Pilot: 

1.  Employee performance rating of record must be at least proficient at the last 
rating cycle and at the two most recent quarterly reviews, no element was 
marked as less than expected. 

2.  Employee must have at least one year of experience in the position of 

record. 

3.  Employee can clearly define specific tasks appropriate for Telework and the 
supervisor concurs with that definition.  Employee and supervisor must 
clearly define performance expectations. 

4.  The employee has the ability to work autonomously while still meeting 

deadlines. 

5.  The employee has exhibited self-starter characteristics, good organizational 

skills, and can function independently. 

6.  The employee must have appropriate and clearly defined job duties that are 

teleworkable.  Appropriate Telework duties have the following 
characteristics: work is portable and can be performed effectively outside 
the office; tasks are easily quantifiable or primarily project-oriented; tasks 

5

 
 
 
 
 
 
FEMA Manual 3000.3 

July 31, 2000 

can be scheduled as single blocks of time; and tasks don’t require frequent 
interaction with a formal/informal work-team or necessitate frequent ad hoc 
meetings.    

7.  Employee safety at both the office and alternate work sites is of utmost 
importance to FEMA (and should be taken into consideration in all three 
modes of Telework – Episodic, Medical and the Regular Telework Pilot).  
Employees must have a safe alternate worksite identified, e.g. home or 
Telework center with adequate space, telephone and without undue 
interruption.  If an employee’s home is the alternate work site, then a FEMA 
Form 14-10, Employee Self-Certification Safety and Health Checklist 
(Appendix A), must be completed and submitted along with an attached 
photograph of the office site.  The supervisor must sign the Checklist.  See 
the Home-Office Self Inspection Guidelines for additional information. 

8. 

If applicable, appropriate arrangements must be in place for childcare, elder 
care, other dependent care, home repair or other non-work related activities 
during Telework hours.  Telework is not an alternative for these basic 
arrangements.  Based on experience in both the private and public sector, 
such activity is likely to disrupt work. 

Eligibility Requirements for Episodic Telework 

Eligibility requirements are the same as for the Regular Telework Pilot Program 
above, except that employees on Episodic Telework will be allowed to work 
consecutive days at a Telework site until project completion or a pre-determined 
time period, that is suitable to the supervisor.   Employees with extensive public 
or internal client contact will be eligible only for Episodic Telework participation.  
To be eligible for Episodic Telework, the nature of the work must be: 

1.  A  project,  or  discrete  portion  of  a  project,  which  is  of  short  duration,  with 

measurable work products; 

2.  Of an irregular or occasional nature (as opposed to regular and recurring); 

and, 

3.  Agreed upon in advance. 

If Episodic Telework is desired by/for an employee, a pre-approved application 
and safety checklist should be on file.  Once work is approved for Telework, a 
Telework agreement will be established and work schedules updated for each 
episodic work cycle.   

6

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FEMA Manual 3000.3 

July 31, 2000 

Eligibility Requirements for Medical Telework 

To be eligible for Medical Telework, one of the following must apply: 

1.  The employee has a debilitating illness or health condition, which limits 
his/her mobility or prevents him/her from working at his/her official duty 
station on a regular basis;  

2.  The employee must be severely disabled and it would be difficult to regularly 

commute to the official duty station; or, 

3.  The employee may, for a specific period of time, be required to care for an ill 

child or relative, where no other reasonable alternative arrangement can be 
made.   

4.  Medical documentation will be required to support all Medical Telework 

requests.  At a minimum, the medical documentation will include a written 
statement from a certified medical practitioner, which includes: 

•= A description of the medical condition; 

•= The approximate expected duration of the medical condition; 

•= Any restrictions which may limit the employee's ability to work at their official 

duty station on a regular basis; and 

•= Any restrictions that may limit the employee’s ability to work at an 

alternate work site. 

5.  Employees approved for medical Telework may work at their alternate work 
site full-time.  However, there must be a realistic expectation of returning to 
at least part-time work in the office within a reasonable period of time as 
supported by medical documentation; and, 

6.  The employee should have job responsibilities with measurable work tasks, 

which can be accomplished at the alternative work site. 

D.  Application Process for Telework  

All employees wishing to participate in any of the Telework Programs must 
complete a FEMA Form 14-9, Telework Application Form (Appendix B).  This is a 
two part form that is to be completed by the employee and the employee’s 
supervisor.  The supervisor will determine if the employee’s job tasks are suitable 

7

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FEMA Manual 3000.3 

July 31, 2000 

for Telework.  If the decision is no, the employee may appeal to their second-line 
supervisor.  The decision of the second-line supervisor is final.  If an employee 
and his/her supervisor agree to participate in the Regular Telework Pilot 
Program, the application is then forwarded to the second-line supervisor for final 
review.  Final applications should be directed to the Directorate/Region/Office 
Telework Coordinator for final processing.  Regular Telework Pilot participants 
are forwarded to the Agency Telework coordinator for approval into the program 
(this is for the Regular Telework Pilot Program only).   

Upon acceptance, all employees must complete a FEMA Form 14-11, Telework 
Agreement (Appendix C).  A signed copy of this agreement must be on file with 
the Directorate/Region/Office Telework Coordinator.  A determination of the 
alternate work site should be made at this time.  Employees choosing to work at 
home must complete a Self-Certification Safety and Health Checklist.  The 
Telework Application and Self-Certification Safety and Health Checklist can be 
completed in advance for Episodic Telework assignments.   

All participants in the FEMA Telework Program are required to attend a brief 
training session prior to participation. 

E.  Responsibilities 

1.  The Director, Associate Directors, Regional Directors, Executive Associate 
Directors, Office Directors and Administrators will: (1) support the Telework 
Program; (2) designate a Telework Coordinator for each Directorate/ 
Office/Region;  

2.  Division Directors, Branch Chiefs, Regional Division Directors will: (1) fairly 

assess each employee’s application for Telework; (2) make the final 
participant decisions for Regular Teleworker participation in the Regular 
Telework Pilot in each Region/Division/Office; and, (3) in cases where an 
employee disputes a disapproval by their first-line supervisor, the second-
line supervisor shall review that application, the decision at this level is not 
appealable, as Telework is not an employee right.  

3.  First Line Supervisor will: (1) complete the appropriate portion of the 

Telework Agreement; and (2) approve or disapprove the Employee 
Telework Application (supervisors must discuss and complete the items 
listed on the Telework Agreement and provide a signed copy of the 
Agreement to the Telework Coordinator); (3) assign or approve appropriate 
work to be performed at the alternate work site; and, (4) maintain work 
activity records and information to evaluate employee participation in the 
program; 

4.  Employees participating will: (1) complete work agreements; (2) adhere to 

agreed-upon hours of work in accordance with established agency policies; 

8

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FEMA Manual 3000.3 

July 31, 2000 

(3) adhere to agency policies for requesting leave; (4) adhere to Telework 
program guidance regarding work products; (5) use agency equipment only 
for official purposes; and, (6) participate in program monitoring activities.  
Employees must complete the FEMA Form 14-12 Employee Self-
Certification Time and Attendance Report (Appendix D) and return it to 
their supervisor on a biweekly basis.  Employees must also complete the 
Employee Self-Certification Safety and Health Checklist, which identifies 
significant safety standards that must be met and return it to their supervisor 
prior to entering into a Telework Agreement if the alternate work site is at 
home. 

5.  Organizations participating in the FEMA Telework Program: Employees and 
supervisors and all co-workers of participating employees should attend the 
FEMA Telework training program.  Co-workers/non-participants are 
encouraged to attend.  This will enable all staff members to understand the 
program and know what is expected of the participating Telework 
employees in areas of communication, scheduling, and performance.  

6.  Directorate/Office/Regional Telework Coordinators will: (1) conduct the 

training program; (2) monitor the selection process; (3) act as a focal point 
within each Region/Directorate/Office for all telework related matters and will 
coordinate with the Telework Program Manager in Human Resources; and, 
(4) maintain copies of all Telework Agreements. 

7.  Telework Program Manager will be the clearinghouse and contact person for 
all Telework issues/matters.  This includes: (1) leading the Telework Project 
Team and Telework coordinators; (2) ensuring that all participating 
supervisors and employees have been notified of their responsibilities; (3) 
overseeing training for all participating employees; (4) providing advice and 
assistance on Telework issues; and, (5) monitoring and evaluating the 
program. 

V. 

PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION 

A.  Training 

A training program has been specifically developed for the FEMA Telework 
Program.  All employees selected for the FEMA Telework Program, and their 
immediate supervisors must attend training prior to their initial Telework 
participation; co-workers are encouraged to attend.  Training will cover Telework 
policies and guidelines; program elements and requirements; personal and 
occupational aspects of Telework agreements; and, computers and telephones.  
It is recommended that employees and their supervisors and co-workers attend 
training together, if possible. 

9

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FEMA Manual 3000.3 

July 31, 2000 

The training program will address some of the following topics: 

1.  Employee topics include – expectations about personal responsibility, 

accountability, time management and self-discipline; forms to be completed, 
communicating with supervisors and co-workers; progress reporting; 
deadlines; ways to avoid isolation; and, family issues. 

2.  Supervisor topics include – managing for results/managing by objectives; 

planning; scheduling and tracking assignments and milestones; 
administration of work schedules; time and attendance and leave; 
supervisory expectations; and, communicating with the Telework employees 
and their co-workers. 

3.  Organization topics include – Telework Program background focusing on 

communication between the Teleworkers and office personnel; performance 
expectations; and, Telework scheduling and contact information. 

B.  Work Agreements 

Each employee must sign a Telework Agreement that covers the terms and 
conditions of the Telework Program.  The work agreement constitutes an 
agreement by the employee and his/her supervisor to adhere to the applicable 
guidelines and policies.  The work agreement covers items such as: the voluntary 
nature of the arrangement; length of Telework assignment; responsibilities for 
timekeeping and leave approval; performance requirements; arrangements for 
child and elder care; proper use and safeguards of government property and 
records; standards of conduct, etc.  Employees participating in any form of 
Telework (Episodic, Medical, or the Regular Telework Pilot) must sign a work 
agreement prior to him/her teleworking.  In addition to completing the Telework 
agreement, employees approved for Episodic Telework must complete the FEMA 
Form 14-11A, Telework Agreement Continuation Form (Appendix E), for each 
additional episodic Telework period.  If a work agreement is not signed, the 
Telework arrangement is not authorized under the FEMA Telework Program. 

C.  Work Schedules 

Please note that the Telework employee is responsible for communicating their 
Telework schedule – when they are absent from the official duty station – to their 
Supervisor and all co-workers.  Thus, the Telework employee should 
communicate a ready means for contact when on the Telework schedule (phone 
numbers, pager numbers, etc.). This can be accomplished by doing the following: 
(1) creating a concise “out of office” voicemail message with the Telework phone 
number noted; (2) utilizing the “Out of Office Assistant” in the Microsoft Outlook 
e-mail system to note their phone number, e-mail address, and/or location during 
Telework rotation; and, (3) prominently posting a written schedule at the normal 
work station at their official duty station.  Employees may also wish to use the 

10

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FEMA Manual 3000.3 

July 31, 2000 

Electronic Calendar System in Microsoft Outlook, especially if the system is used 
and understood throughout their office. 

Work scheduled away from the office will vary depending upon the individual 
arrangements between employees and his/her supervisors. Regular Telework 
Pilot Program participants will be limited to non-consecutive days per week at the 
alternate work site.  This will ensure the employee is available in the office during 
the week for face-to-face meetings, access to resources, and facilities etc.  
Telework employees should make contact with their supervisor, or a designee, at 
the beginning of each Telework day.  Employees should prearrange any and all 
changes to their schedule with their supervisor in advance.  Failure to do so may 
result in the termination of the Telework Agreement.  In the event of an 
emergency, contact your supervisor as soon as possible following your notice of 
that emergency. 

Telework schedules must identify the days and times the employee will work in 
each work setting.  Work schedules can parallel those in the office or may be 
structured to meet the needs of the participating employee and his/her 
supervisor.  Flexitour and Compressed Work Schedules (5-4-9) may be available 
to Telework employees within established FEMA policy.  However, whether an 
employee may participate in both the Compressed Work Schedule (CWS) and 
the FEMA Telework Program at the same time is at the discretion of the 
supervisor. Supervisors are encouraged to consider retaining an adequate 
staffing contingent, vacations, travel schedules, etc.   

The supervisor may establish 'core' hours that the employee is to be available 
during the Telework day(s).  Typically, the core time is from 9:30 a.m. to 3:30 
p.m. (with a half-hour for a non-paid lunch period).  Within this schedule the 
employee, with the supervisor’s approval, could vary both starting and ending 
times, as long as the employee is available during the core hours.  Please note 
that regularly scheduled work arrangements cannot go past 6:00 p.m. or begin 
before 7:00 a.m.  Employees may not accumulate credit hours while working at 
an alternate work site.   

Telework assignments do not eliminate office/job participation.  In the event of 
specific attendance needs, the employee should be prepared to conference in to 
meetings at Headquarters and other locales.  If telephone conferencing is not 
available, not possible or will not have the appropriate effect, the employee 
should report to their official duty station or other location on those days when 
their presence is necessary.  

Management reserves the right to alter the employee's established work 
schedule to accommodate peak workload office demands, holiday staffing needs, 
or for any other official purpose with advance notification of at least 24 hours (24 
hours is generally expected, every effort should be made to provide the 

11

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FEMA Manual 3000.3 

July 31, 2000 

teleworker with sufficient notice).  This may include requiring a teleworking 
employee to come to the official duty station on a Telework day. 

In the event of disaster or other emergency operations, all employees with 
disaster responsibility or on emergency team assignment, must return to his/her 
official duty station and/or act in accordance with plans, procedures, and 
guidance currently in place (e.g. FEMA Headquarters, Regional Office, and 
Disaster Field Offices (DFO)).  If the Agency is involved in an emergency 
response any employee may be suspended from Telework at the discretion of 
the supervisor. Telework employees may return to an approved Telework 
schedule only upon approval of his/her supervisor. 

As always, a supervisor is responsible for ensuring a quality core staff at the 
office site at all times, including holidays, disaster and other times.   

D.  Time and Attendance  

All time and attendance actions should comply with established Agency and 
government policies.  Specific items are summarized below: 

1.  Hours of Duty.  Employees may work standard schedules (e.g. 8 hours per 
day, 5 days a week) or follow alternative work schedules (e.g. the 5-4-9 
Compressed Schedule) depending upon the agreement between the 
employee and the supervisor.  See Section V., C. Work Schedules, for a 
discussion of supervisory considerations in this decision. 

Please note that for the Regular Telework Pilot Program, only non-
consecutive Telework days can be approved per week. All employees 
taking advantage of the FEMA Telework Program are expected to report all 
scheduling needs to his/her supervisor in advance, and to cooperate with 
his/her supervisor in all circumstances. 

Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA).  The existing rules in Title 5, United States 
Code and in the Fair Labor Standards Act governing overtime also apply to 
Telework arrangements. Overtime is time worked at official duties in excess 
of the scheduled tour of duty that is ordered and approved.  It is the 
responsibility of the supervisor to regulate and control the use of overtime.  
Employees are not authorized to work overtime without prior supervisory 
approval.  Employees are responsible for requesting, in advance, approval 
to work in excess of his/her normal hours of duty.  An employee who works 
overtime without advance supervisory approval may be removed from the 
Telework Program and is not entitled to compensation for any unauthorized 
overtime worked. 

2.  Leave.  The policies for requesting annual leave, sick leave, or other 

absences from duty remain unchanged.  Employees are responsible for 

12

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FEMA Manual 3000.3 

July 31, 2000 

obtaining approval for leave in advance from the supervisor.  The supervisor 
must inform the timekeeper of the employee’s leave usage. 

3.  Certification and Control of Time and Attendance (T&A).  Proper monitoring 
and certification of employee work time is critical to the success of the 
program.  Supervisors must report time and attendance to ensure that 
employees are paid only for work performed and to ensure that absences 
from scheduled tours of duty are accounted for.  GAO guidelines governing 
certification of time and attendance require agencies with employees 
working at remote sites to provide reasonable assurance that they are 
working when scheduled.  Reasonable assurance may include occasional 
supervisor telephone calls, and determining reasonableness of work output 
versus the time spent.  Telework participants and supervisors are 
encouraged to develop regular times to contact each other on Telework 
days.  Telework employees must complete the Employee Self-Certification 
Time and Attendance Report and return it to his/her supervisor by 9:00 a.m. 
on the Monday after the close of the pay period.  Agency policies and 
regulations regarding compensatory time apply.   

4.  Administrative Leave, Dismissals, Emergency Closings.  Although a variety 

of circumstances may affect individual situations, the principles governing 
administrative leave, dismissals, and agency closing remain unchanged.  
The ability to conduct work (and the nature of the impediments), whether at 
home, at a Telework center, or at the office, determines when an employee 
may be placed on excused absence.  For example, if a Regular Telework 
Pilot employee is working at home on a day where the office location (e.g. 
Federal FEMA Headquarters or responsible Regional office), is dismissed 
early due to unforeseen circumstances, the Telework employee is not 
excused since they are not prevented from performing his/her duties.  On 
the other hand, if a teleworker is working at the alternate work site and there 
is an unforeseen event (e.g., a power outage in the neighborhood), the 
Telework employee may be impeded from performing his/her duties and 
may possibly be excused for the period of the event.  The Telework 
employee should contact the first level supervisor immediately.  When an 
employee knows in advance of a situation that would preclude working at 
the alternate work site, either time in the office or leave should be 
scheduled. 

E.  Pay Issues  

Existing Agency regulations and guidance on pay administration apply to 
individuals participating in Telework. 

1.  Duty Station.  For pay purposes, the official duty station is the employee’s 

regular duty station, not the alternate work site. 

13

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FEMA Manual 3000.3 

July 31, 2000 

2.  Special Salary Rates.  For pay purposes, the official duty station serves as 

the basis for determining special salary rates. 

3.  Overtime.  The existing rules on overtime under Title 5, United States Code, 
and the Fair Labor Standards Act apply to Telework employees.  Advance 
approval from the supervisor is required for overtime for any Telework 
employee.  

F.  Facilities  

1.  Home Office (Alternate Work Site) Space.  Employees participating in 

Telework must have a designated workspace or workstation for performance 
of his/her work-at-home duties.  Requirements will vary depending upon the 
nature of the work and the equipment needed to perform the work.  At a 
minimum, an employee and supervisor should be able to easily 
communicate by telephone with his/her supervisor and organization during 
the Telework day.  Employees are required to maintain this workspace in a 
safe condition, free from hazards and other dangers and to complete the 
Self-Certification Checklist as part of the Telework Agreement (See Section 
IV. C., Eligibility Requirements for Regular Telework (7.); and Section V. J, 
Worker’s Compensation; and the FEMA Telework Safety Brochure).  
Provided the employee is given 24 hours advance written notice, the 
employee agrees to permit periodic inspections by the Agency of the 
alternate work site during the employee's normal working hours to ensure 
proper maintenance of Agency-owned equipment and/or work site 
conformance with safety standards.  The supervisor and/or the appropriately 
qualified personnel will conduct these inspections when necessary.  

2.  Home Utility or Insurance Expense.  Incremental costs associated with 

working at home will not be paid by the Agency.  Potential savings to the 
employee resulting from reduced commuting, meals, etc., may offset any 
incidental increase in utility expenses.  Modifications to personal telephone 
lines or service will not be provided or paid for by the Agency. 

3.  Miscellaneous Expenses.  Costs associated with copying work-related 
materials, fax charges, express mail, etc. will not be reimbursed by the 
Agency.   Employees participating in Telework should complete duties that 
require these support activities at the official duty station, using Agency 
equipment, services, and materials.   

4.  Other Facilities.  There are other work sites available to employees to 

facilitate Telework , such as, alternate FEMA locations, other government 
buildings, and GSA approved Telework  centers.  These facilities may 
require payments for space.  If the alternate work site requested by an 
employee and agreed to by the supervisor is other than home, any costs 
become the responsibility of the employee’s sponsoring organization.  

14

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FEMA Manual 3000.3 

July 31, 2000 

G.  Telecommunications, Equipment and Supplies 

Once selected for the FEMA Telework Program, including all Regular Telework 
Pilot Participants, who will be working from home will be asked to complete an 
equipment questionnaire.  Some participants may already be equipped to 
perform his/her assignments at home with his/her own equipment or do not 
require equipment to conduct the tasks (e.g. telephone work).  Based on the 
individual needs of participants, following are guidelines for what the Agency may 
provide: 

1.  Telephone Services.  To the extent possible, long-distance telephone calls 
should be placed on scheduled days in the office.  If work related long 
distance calls are necessary on Telework  days, FEMA may, on a case-by-
case basis, provide telephone credit cards to Telework Pilot participants.  
However, these must be preapproved in accordance with FEMA procedures.  
Employees may use “800” numbers to communicate with FEMA 
Headquarters, Regional Offices, and other FEMA work locations where 
“800” service has been established for the Agency, Region, and/or Office. 

2.  Communications.  Telephone lines with touch-tone dialing are necessary in 

order to access voicemail.  If an employee’s work requires use of the 
internet or other communications related tasks, then the employee should 
install a second telephone line for computer use.  This will allow the 
employee to utilize his/her telephone line while using a modem to connect 
with the Headquarters/Regional LAN.  FEMA will not install or pay for 
additional telephone lines or service into an employee's home. 

Telework employees working out of their home office should check their e-
mail consistently if required by their job duties.  They should not keep the 
FEMA e-mail system open all day, but should enter the system on a periodic 
basis.   

Telework employees requiring access to his/her e-mail will be required to 
have a Terminal Access Controller Access Control System (TACACS) 
account.  If you are selected to participate, and e-mail is a necessity, your 
Telework  coordinator will provide information regarding telecommunications 
access.   Access to the FEMA network through TACACS is limited and 
teleworkers may only remain online for the short duration necessary to 
retrieve e-mail.  Abuse of TACACS access could result in a teleworker 
losing his/her account privileges. 

3.  Computers, Agency-owned Equipment, etc.  Personal ownership of a 

computer is not a prerequisite for participation in the Telework Program. 

15

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FEMA Manual 3000.3 

July 31, 2000 

If needed, the sponsoring organization may supply the following equipment 
and software for home use by approved employees as available: 

•= Stand-alone 486 (minimum level) computers (CPU, monitor, mouse and 
keyboard).  Computers must be compliant with “Y2K” requirements.  
Printers and modems will not be provided by the Agency for home use.  

•= Agency standard software packages (Microsoft Windows, Norton Anti-

Virus, and Office 97 Professional Suite) 

Employees may not remove desk top computer equipment from the official 
duty station for purposes of Telework . Prior approval must be obtained 
before any property is removed from the Agency or Telework  location and 
property passes issued for each piece of equipment must be obtained. 

Agency-owned property such as computers and other telecommunications 
equipment are to be used by the teleworker in accordance with FEMA policy 
on limited personal use of government equipment.  Strict adherence to 
regulations concerning the safeguarding and removal of all equipment is 
essential.  All Agency-owned property must be returned to the Agency upon 
request.  Employees are responsible for ensuring the return of that property 
in the same condition as when it left the Agency property.  If Agency-owned 
property is damaged or destroyed the employee must immediately report 
this to their supervisor for determination. 

In the event Agency-owned equipment or software requires service, the 
equipment must be returned to the official duty station by the employee for 
such work.   

4.  Supplies.  If needed, the Agency will provide necessary office supplies 

(paper, pens, diskettes, etc.).  Employees should obtain these items from 
the official duty station supply room or through the regular procedure at their 
official duty station.  The Agency will not reimburse employees for any 
supplies purchased independently, nor will the Agency provide office 
furniture. 

5.  Termination of Participation. Upon termination of the Telework Agreement 

all equipment and property must be returned to the agency. 

6.  Help Desk Services.  Telework employees will be allowed to contact his/her 
respective Help Desk for consultation while at his/her alternate worksite.  
Help Desk services will be limited to advice.  No remote servicing will be 
provided.  When a teleworker calls the Help Desk, he/she must identify 
him/herself as such so the Help Desk can track the impact of Telework on 
his/her operations.  If the problem cannot be resolved over the telephone, 
the computer must be returned to the official duty station for servicing.   

16

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FEMA Manual 3000.3 

July 31, 2000 

All equipment, software, data, and supplies furnished by the Agency shall remain 
the sole property of the Agency.  Employees must agree to complete Option 
Form 7, Property Pass/Equipment Inventory Form and to return these items upon 
request of the Agency or upon termination of the Telework Agreement.  
Employees are responsible for the safety and security of all equipment and data 
provided by or generated for the Agency, including maintaining security and 
confidentiality.  Agency-owned software shall not be duplicated.  Employees are 
responsible for maintaining his/her personally owned equipment. 

H.  Position and Performance  

1.  Position Descriptions.  Changes to position descriptions are not required as 
the Telework arrangement should not change the actual position duties. 

2.  Performance Standards.  Performance standards or workplans must have 
clearly defined performance requirements.  Explicit and objective “norms" 
for work output should be based on experience with those required and 
sustained in the office and monitored through scheduled and required 
progress reports. 

      I.    Monitoring and Evaluation 

As mentioned in the eligibility criteria, all selected Regular Telework Pilot 
participants must agree to participate in program evaluation activities.  These 
may include, but are not limited to: 

•= any pre-program baseline survey; 

•= participation in focus group discussions; 

•= a mid-year follow-up assessment (survey/interview); 

•= a full program review; and 

•= site visits by supervisors and/or a Health and Safety representative. 

The final assessment will include a review of the Telework  arrangements and 
any changes that may be needed, due to reorganization or reassignment of 
teleworker's assigned duties. 

After the first year of participation, and each subsequent year, a brief 
recertification process will be necessary to continue in the Telework Program for 
the following year.  This will consist of the employee and supervisor discussing 
and reviewing the Telework  arrangement to see that it is still effective and 
desirable, and renewing the Telework Agreement.  A copy of the annual 

17

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FEMA Manual 3000.3 

July 31, 2000 

recertification form must be forwarded to the Telework Coordinator for the 
employee’s official duty station.  

J.   Workers’ Compensation 

Teleworking employees are covered by the Federal Employees Compensation 
Act (FECA) and may qualify for workers' compensation benefits if an on-the-job 
injury or occupational illness is sustained while the employee is performing 
official duties at the official or alternate work site.  Any accident or injury 
occurring at the alternate work site must be brought to the immediate attention of 
the supervisor.  Because an employment-related accident sustained by an 
employee participating in the Telework  program would occur outside of the 
premises of the official duty station, supervisors must ensure that claims of this 
type are immediately brought to the attention of the FEMA OHRM Employee and 
Labor Relations Division.  (Reminder: employees must complete the Employee 
Self-Certification Safety Checklist, which identifies significant safety standards 
that should be met and return it to his/her supervisor prior to entering into a 
Telework Agreement.) 

If there are any changes in the work environment that could affect safety, the 
employee is required to immediately submit a new "Employee Self-Certification 
Safety Checklist” and photograph of the office space.  

K.  Records Management 

All FEMA employees, including those participating in the Telework Program, are 
required to comply with the following guidelines on record or duplicate record use 
when working at other locations.  Compliance with these policies will protect the 
agency and the employee in the event of litigation or government investigation.  
During an investigation, all relevant records must be made available to 
investigators and auditors.  Title 18, USC, Section 1516 makes it a criminal 
violation punishable by a fine or imprisonment to obstruct an audit. 

1.  An “official record” is defined by the Federal Records Act as “ . . . all books, 

papers, maps, photographs, machine readable materials or other 
documentary materials, regardless of physical form or characteristics, made 
or received by an agency of the United States Government under Federal 
Law or in connection with the transaction of public business and preserved 
or appropriate for preservation by the agency or its legitimate successor as 
evidence of the organization, functions, policies, decisions, procedures, 
operations, or other activities of the Government….” 

2.  Employees may not take official records home.  If official records are 

needed for telework, duplicates must be made at the official duty station.  
Those duplicates remain the property of FEMA.  Duplicates should be 
treated as original records and returned to the office, even in the event 

18

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FEMA Manual 3000.3 

July 31, 2000 

destruction is necessary.  The use of duplicate official records will be for a 
stated period of time and may be noted in the Telework Agreement, such as 
the project demands.   

3.  When duplicate copies/records used at Telework  locations are no longer 

needed by the employee, they must be returned to the office to be recycled 
or destroyed.  In the event that any information should be added to or 
changed in this duplicate record, it must be added to or changed in the 
official record. 

4.  Confidential information or national security classified information may not 
be removed from its secure location even in duplicate.  Document rules for 
the teleworker’s organization must be followed. 

5.  Care must be taken to ensure that records subject to the Privacy Act and 
sensitive non-classified data are not disclosed to anyone except to those 
who are authorized access to such information in order to perform his/her 
duties.  Organizations allowing employees to access records subject to the 
Privacy Act from a remote work site must maintain appropriate 
administrative, technical and administrative safeguards to secure the 
security and confidentiality of the records.  When records subject to the 
Privacy Act are maintained or used by employees working at home or at 
alternate work sites, the office in charge of that information should revise the 
appropriate record system notices to indicate that the off-site systems 
location is authorized. 

L.  Other Issues 

1.  Liability.  Advice and assistance regarding official matters involving legal 
claims and liability should be referred to the Office of General Counsel, 
General Law Division, located at FEMA Headquarters in Washington, DC.  
Generally, teleworking employees are covered and may file claims under the 
Federal Employees Compensation Act, the Military Personnel and Civilian 
Employees Claims Act, and the Federal Tort Claims Act for personal injury, 
property loss/damage, or Federal employee negligence issues. 

2.  Tax Benefits.  Generally, no expenses are allowed for home offices or work 
space unless used exclusively on a regular basis as a principal place of 
business.  Employees who believe they may be entitled to tax deductions 
based on home office or work space, depreciation of employee-owned 
personal computers and related equipment, etc., should consult his/her tax 
advisor or the Internal Revenue Service for information on tax laws and 
interpretations. 

19

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FEMA Manual 3000.3 

July 31, 2000 

VI. 

TERMINATING OR CHANGING A TELEWORK ARRANGEMENT 

The Telework Coordinator must be notified if: 

•= an issue or concern arises with the Telework arrangement; 

•= a change in the Telework Agreement is needed; or, 

•= a Telework Agreement is terminated or suspended. 

A.  Termination 

1.  An employee participating in the program may withdraw from the program 
after providing sufficient advance notice (24 hours is generally expected, 
every effort should be made to provide the teleworker with sufficient notice). 

2.  An annual performance rating below proficient automatically terminates an 

employee's teleworking arrangement. 

3.  Management retains the right to suspend or terminate an employee's 

Telework  participation at any time, generally with 24 hours notice (24 hours 
is generally expected; every effort should be made to provide the teleworker 
with sufficient notice), if: 

•= Emergency operations and/or assignments are activated; 

•= The employee’s performance declines or the employee receives a less 
than expected  on any critical element during a quarterly performance 
review; 

•= The employee fails to fully comply with the agreed-upon program 

requirements; 

•=

•=

If the employee is involved in misconduct which is actionable under 
FEMA Manual 3310.1, Disciplinary/Adverse Actions Procedures; or, 

If it no longer benefits the Agency to have the employee work at an 
alternate work site. 

4.  A Telework arrangement may be terminated if the employee fails to provide 

requested information, or fails to participate in requested program monitoring 
and evaluation activities (including surveys, focus groups, etc.). 

5.  Upon termination of the Telework Agreement, the employee must return all 
equipment provided for that employee to assist in Telework by the Agency.  
Accountability will be maintained.  Failure by the employee to return all 

20

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FEMA Manual 3000.3 

July 31, 2000 

Government equipment may result in disciplinary or adverse actions being 
taken against the employee. 

B.  Change Issues 

Whenever any element of the Telework Agreement changes (job position, work 
assignment, home office, or personnel changes, etc.), the Telework arrangement 
must be reevaluated and/or a new agreement put in place if participation is still 
approved.  Examples of such changes are: 

•= The Telework  employee transfers to a different job and/or organizational 

unit, or the work of the position changes; or 

•= The supervisor of a Telework employee changes. 

Whenever changes occur, the following actions must be taken: 

1. 

If the change results in a new supervisor for the Telework  employee and the 
employee would like to continue teleworking: (1) the Telework Coordinator 
must be notified; (2) the new supervisor will be provided orientation/training, 
given any relevant information/materials associated with progress of the 
project; and, (3) the employee and supervisor will assess suitability for 
Telework  and if approved, a new Telework Agreement must be put in place. 

2. 

If the job task/assignment changes, the employee and supervisor must 
reassess the employee’s suitability for teleworking and, if appropriate, 
complete a new Telework Agreement. 

Teleworkers may continue his/her teleworking arrangement until the 
reassessments are complete.  Exceptions to this policy may be made on a case-
by-case basis.  All exception requests and supporting documentation should be 
submitted to the Telework Program Coordinator for the employee’s 
Region/Office/Division. 

C.  Suspension of Telework Participation 

It may be necessary, under extenuating circumstances, to temporarily suspend a 
Telework Agreement (e.g., extensive out-of-town travel or disaster duty).  In 
these cases, the supervisor and/or employee must notify the Telework 
Coordinator of the duration and reason for the suspension. 

21

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
U.S. Department of Homeland Security
 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715
 
Equal Employment Opportunity Program Status Report 

Fiscal Year 201

 
 
 
Table of Contents
 

Parts A-D 

Agency Identifying Information .................................................................................2 


Part E  

Executive Summary ....................................................................................................5 


Part F 

Part G 

Part H 

Part I 

Part J 

Certification and Signatures......................................................................................26 


Agency Self-Assessment Checklist ..........................................................................27 


Plan to Attain Essential Elements of a Model EEO Program...................................42 


Plans to Eliminate Identified Barriers.......................................................................57 


Program Plan for the Employment of Individuals with Disabilities .........................81 


DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

1 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART A-D 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

For period covering October 1, 2013, to September 30, 2014. 

PART A 

1. Agency

1. Department of Homeland Security

Department 
or Agency 
Identifying 
Information 

1.a. 2nd level reporting component 

1.b. 3rd level reporting component 

1.c. 4th level reporting component 

2. Address

2. 245 Murray Lane, SW, Bldg. 410, MS 0191

3. City, State, Zip Code

3. Washington, D.C. 20528

4. CPDF Code 

5. FIPS code(s) 

4. HS

5. 7000

PART B 

1. Enter total number of permanent full-time and part-time employees

1. 179,256

Total 
Employment 

2. Enter total number of temporary employees

3. Enter total number employees paid from non-appropriated funds

4. TOTAL EMPLOYMENT [add lines B 1 through 3]

2. 10,810

3.

1,405

4. 191,471

PART C 

1. Head of Agency

1. Jeh Charles Johnson, Secretary

Official Title

Agency 
Official(s) 
Responsible 
for Oversight 
of EEO 
Program(s) 

2. Agency Head Designee

2. Megan H. Mack, Officer for Civil Rights and Civil Liberties (CRCL)

3. Principal EEO Director/Official

3. Veronica Venture, Deputy Officer for CRCL and Director for Equal

Employment Opportunity and Diversity Programs, GS/SES

4. Title VII Affirmative EEO

Program Official

5. Section 501 Affirmative Action

Program Official

4. Elaine McKinney, Director, Diversity Management Section, CRCL

5. Tanya Cantrell, Equal Employment Manager

6. Complaint Processing Program

6. Chrystal Young, Director, Complaints Management and Adjudication

Manager

Section, CRCL

7. EEO Staff Statistician

7. Michael LePore, Statistician, Diversity Management Section, CRCL

8. Special Emphasis Program

8. Dennis Oden, Equal Employment Manager, Diversity Management

Manager (SEPM)

Section, CRCL

9. Special Emphasis Program

9. Conchetta Belgrave, Equal Employment Manager, Diversity Management

Manager (SEPM)

Section, CRCL

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014

2

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART A-D 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

PART D 

Subordinate Component and Location (City/State) 

CPDF and FIPS codes  

List of 
Subordinate 
Components 
Covered in This 
Report 

U.S. Customs and Border Protection 
Washington, DC 

U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services 
Washington, DC 

U.S. Coast Guard 
Washington, DC 

Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Washington, DC 

Federal Law Enforcement Training Center 
Glynco, GA 

U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement 
Washington, DC 

U.S. Secret Service 
Washington, DC 

Transportation Security Administration 
Arlington, VA 

Headquarters - Office of the Secretary 
Washington, DC 

Headquarters - Office of the Inspector General 
Washington, DC 

Headquarters – Management Directorate 
Washington, DC 

Headquarters - Science & Technology Directorate 
Washington, DC 

TR 93 

TR 93 

TR 93 

TR 93 

TR 93 

TR 93 

TR 93 

TR 93 

TR 93 

TR 93 

15 

89 

17 

22 

23 

16 

60 

35 

11 

20 

TR 93 

50 & 51 

TR 93 

30 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014

3

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART A-D 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

EEOC FORMS and Documents Included With This Report 

■Executive Summary [FORM 715-01 PART E], that includes:

▫Brief paragraph describing the agency's mission
and mission-related functions 

▫Summary of Analysis of Work Force Profiles including
net change analysis and comparison to RCLF 

▫Summary of results of agency's annual self-
assessment against MD-715 "Essential Elements" 

▫Optional Annual Self-Assessment Checklist Against
Essential Elements [FORM 715-01PART G] 

▫Summary of EEO Plan objectives planned to
 
eliminate identified barriers or correct program
 
deficiencies
 

■Copies of relevant EEO Policy Statement(s)
and/or excerpts from revisions made to EEO 

Policy Statements 


■Special Program Plan for the Recruitment, Hiring,
and Advancement of Individuals With Targeted
 
Disabilities for agencies with 1,000 or more
 
employees [FORM 715-01 PART J]
 

■EEO Plan To Eliminate Identified Barrier
[FORM 715-01 PART I] for each identified barrier

■Copy of Workforce Data Tables as necessary to
support Executive Summary and/or EEO Plans 

■Summary of EEO Plan action items implemented
or accomplished

■Organizational Chart

■Statement of Establishment of Continuing Equal
Employment Opportunity Programs 
[FORM 715-01 PART F] 

■Copy of Facility Accessability Survey results as
necessary to support EEO Action Plan for building 
renovation projects 

■EEO Plan To Attain the Essential Elements of a
Model EEO Program [FORM 715-01PART H] for
each programmatic essential element requiring
improvement

■Copy of data from 462 Report as necessary to
support action items related to Complaint 
Processing Program deficiencies, ADR 
effectiveness, or other compliance issues 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014

4

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART E 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

Part E - Executive Summary
 

Introduction 

This Equal Employment Opportunity Program Status Report for Fiscal Year 2014 (FY14) outlines the U.S. 
Department of Homeland Security’s (DHS) Equal Employment Opportunity Program activities, as required by the 
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission’s (EEOC) Management Directive 715. This report highlights 
DHS’s accomplishments in establishing and maintaining a model program by promoting equal employment 
opportunity and identifying areas for improvement for all of its employees and applicants.  The report also 
provides the FY15 plan to address any programmatic deficiencies.  In addition to this Departmental Management 
Directive 715 report, each DHS Component submits its own report to the EEOC.  Directorates and headquarters 
programs reports are accumulated and included in this report. 

The U.S. Department of Homeland Security 

DHS’s mission is to make the nation safe, secure, and resilient against terrorism and other hazards, where the 
American way of life can thrive.  DHS’s mission is comprised of five major areas of responsibility: 1) Preventing 
Terrorism and Enhancing Security; 2) Securing and Managing Our Borders; 3) Enforcing and Administering Our 
Immigration Laws; 4) Safeguarding and Securing Cyberspace; and 5) Ensuring Resilience to Disasters.  In 
addition, DHS specifically focuses on maturing the homeland security enterprise.  Over its eleven years, DHS has 
coordinated the transition of multiple agencies and programs into a single, integrated agency focused on 
protecting the American people and the homeland. 

The Office for Civil Rights and Civil Liberties 

The Office for Civil Rights and Civil Liberties (CRCL) supports the Department’s mission to secure the nation 
while preserving individual liberty, fairness, and equality under the law.  CRCL is responsible for overseeing the 
integration of civil rights and civil liberties into all of the Department’s activities.  CRCL accomplishes this by: 
directing, overseeing, and coordinating activities for the protection and promotion of civil rights and civil liberties 
for members of the public; advising Department leadership and state and local partners of ways to promote 
respect for civil rights and civil liberties in policy creation and implementation; informing individuals and 
communities whose civil rights and civil liberties may be affected by DHS policies and activities; promoting 
appropriate attention within the Department to concerns and experiences of these individuals or communities; 
investigating and resolving civil rights and civil liberties complaints filed by the public regarding Department 
policies or activities, or actions taken by Department personnel; and leading the Department’s equal employment 
opportunity programs and promoting workforce diversity and merit system principles.  CRCL’s Equal 
Employment Opportunity and Diversity Division includes the following organizational units:  DHS-Headquarters 
Equal Employment Opportunity Office (DHS HQ Equal Employment Opportunity); Diversity Management 
Section; and Equal Employment Opportunity Complaints Management Adjudication Section.  Another part of 
CRCL, the Programs and Compliance Division, falls outside the scope of the Management Directive 715. 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

5 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART E 

Program Elements 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

In Management Directive 715, six elements serve as the foundation for a model equal employment opportunity 
program: 
•	  Demonstrated commitment from agency leadership; 

•	 

Integration of equal employment opportunity into the agency’s strategic mission; 

•	  Management and program accountability; 

•	  Proactive prevention of unlawful discrimination; 

•	  Efficiency; and 

•	  Responsiveness and legal compliance. 

Essential Element A – Demonstrated Commitment from Agency Leadership 

•	 

In the spring of 2014, the Deputy Secretary established the Employee Engagement Steering Committee, a 

representative body of employees from across the Department to address the issues of greatest importance to 

DHS employees. 

•	  Megan H. Mack, Officer, CRCL, continues to represent DHS on the White House Council on Women and 

Girls.  The Council on Women and Girls includes two subgroups: Science, Technology, Engineering, and 

Mathematics (STEM); and Women Veterans.   

•	  Due to both the volume and significance of law enforcement positions within the Department, the CRCL 

Diversity Management Section coordinated a Department-wide study on Women in Law Enforcement that 

will be completed with findings and associated recommendations during FY15.  Focus groups were 

conducted during FY14, soliciting direct feedback from women in a variety of law enforcement occupations 

throughout five DHS Components.  The study will offer benchmarks from other federal law enforcement 

agencies, identify perceived barriers to EEO and diversity, and provide recommendations and strategies to 

achieve a model workplace that values diversity and provides equality of opportunity. 

•	  TSA’s Deputy Supervisory Federal Air Marshal in Charge from its Washington Field Office was appointed as 

the National President of Women in Federal Law Enforcement (WIFLE). 

•	 

In early FY14, CRCL’s Diversity Management Section conducted two remaining Component site visits on 

FY12 Equal Employment Opportunity and Diversity Reports, one with the Federal Emergency Management 

Agency (FEMA) and the second with DHS Headquarters (DHS HQ).  The Component site visits were a 

follow-up to a briefing on Equal Employment Opportunity and Diversity Reports that focused on DHS trends. 

Essential Element B – Integration of EEO into the Agency’s Strategic Mission 

•	  DHS continues implementing the U.S. Department of Homeland Security Workforce Strategy, Fiscal Years 

2011-2016, signed by the (former) DHS Secretary on December 21, 2010.  It sets specific goals, objectives, 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

6 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART E 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

and performance measures to ensure that DHS attracts, develops, and retains a talented and diverse workforce 

to secure America.  

• 	 

In 2014, OPM launched a new training program, fulfilling a requirement under Executive Order 13548 to 

provide comprehensive training on disability employment.  Modeled after the DHS CRCL’s Employment of 

People with Disabilities: A Roadmap to Success, the OPM online course explores the recruitment, 

interviewing, providing reasonable accommodations, and hiring of individuals with disabilities. Both courses 

are available on the DHS learning management system.  CRCL’s course is also available to the public at: 

http://www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/training/xus/crcl/employmentdisabilities/Employment_Disabilities/index. 

htm. OPM’s new mandatory program is available at  A Roadmap to Success: Hiring, Retaining and Including 

People with Disabilities. The OPM course is mandatory for all employees that recommend, initiate, take, or 

approve any personnel actions. Employees are required to complete this course every other year. 

• 	  DHS continues to implement the U.S. Department of Homeland Security Diversity and Inclusion Plan, Fiscal 

Years 2012-2015.  The Plan sets specific goals, objectives, and performance measures, which ensure that 

DHS secures a high-performing workforce drawn from all segments of society, cultivates a culture that 

encourages collaboration, flexibility, and fairness, and institutionalizes diversity and inclusion as a key 

strategic priority across all of DHS’ programs.  

•	  During FY14, CRCL continued its participation in recurring high-level strategic activities, including: The 

Secretary’s Bi-Weekly Component Heads’ meetings; DHS Management Council meetings (chaired by the 

Under Secretary for Management and composed of all DHS Component management heads); Human Capital 

Leadership meetings (chaired by the Chief Human Capital Officer and composed of all DHS Component 

Human Resources Directors); and the Workforce Planning Council, which shapes the workforce planning and 

workforce measurement programs for the Department. In FY14, the DHS Equal Employment Opportunity 

and Diversity Council led by CRCL commenced development of an Equal Employment Opportunity Council 

Strategic Plan.  The Plan will articulate both a strategic vision for the Equal Employment Opportunity 

Council and the tactics necessary to carry out that vision.  In FY14, two strategic planning sessions were held. 

The Plan will be finalized during FY15. 

Essential Element C – Management and Program Accountability 

•	  CRCL provided training on reasonable accommodations and employment of Individuals with Disabilities and 

Targeted Disabilities through periodic meetings of the Disability Employment & Accessibility Council.  This 

council is comprised of DHS Component disability program and reasonable accommodations program 

managers.  

•	  CRCL continues to collaborate with OCHCO on many initiatives and programs, including the strategic goals 

identified in the Human Capital Operational Plan and the Diversity and Inclusion Plan.  

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

7 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART E 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

•	  CRCL conducted two technical assistance and training sessions at FEMA and HQ. 

•	  CRCL provided training on how to better collaborate with Tribal Colleges and Universities through periodic 

meetings of the DHS Tribal Colleges and Universities Program Council. This Council is comprised of DHS 

Component Tribal Colleges and Universities Program Managers.  

•	  The DHS Corporate Recruitment Council developed the Coordinated Recruiting and Outreach Strategy FY 

12-17 to increase outreach to diverse groups and enhance efficiencies in recruiting across the department.  As 

a result, the Corporate Recruitment Council:  

o   Developed  a Top 25 list of recruiting and outreach events targeting diverse populations and 

events focused on law enforcement, DHS’s largest mission critical occupation; 

o	  Established national and regional recruitment initiatives to increase the effectiveness of cross-

functional recruiting activities.  Specifically, the Corporate Recruitment Council coordinated a 

DHS presence at eight recruiting events focused on law enforcement, women, and diverse 

populations:  WIFLE; National Asian Peace Officers Association (NAPOA); National 

Organization of Black Law Enforcement Executives (NOBLE); National Native American Law 

Enforcement Association (NNALEA); Congressional Black Caucus Foundation (CBC); League 

of United Latin American Citizens (LULAC); Hispanic Associations of Colleges and Universities 

(HACU); Hispanic American Police Command Officer Association (HAPCOA); 

o	  Revised Component Recruitment and Outreach Plans (CROP) to enhance recruiting efforts to 

meet current and long-term needs. The CROP is used to assess and evaluate components outreach 

efforts to underrepresented groups with a focus on mission-critical occupations. Components 

completed the revised templates for FY14 to include long-term staffing gap projections and 

planned strategies to fill those gaps. This process required Component recruiters to collaborate 

with workforce planners to identify staffing gaps for two out-years.  The FY15 CROPs were 

issued to components and are scheduled to be finalized and evaluated in preparation for the new 

fiscal year. Additionally, an Accountability Checklist was developed and implemented to assess 

the CROP submissions for accuracy and completion; and 

o	  Reformatted the DHS Recruiter Training to reduce costs and enhance collaboration into a virtual 

format and piloted via webcast to three locations; the Pacific Northwest, the Southern Border, and 

Southeast area.  This training enabled DHS to send local recruiters with general knowledge about 

employment opportunities in all nine DHS components to recruit across the department. 

•	  Overall results of FY14 exit survey indicated the following top three reasons employees separated:  personal 

or family related, advancement opportunities, supervisor/management.  Similar to prior years, respondents 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

8 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART E 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

were most dissatisfied with their second level managers, attributed to lack of management skills and poor 

communications. 

Essential Element D – Proactive Prevention 

•	  DHS continues to conduct an annual self-assessment to monitor progress, identify areas where barriers may 

operate to exclude racial, national origin, gender groups, or qualified Individuals with Disabilities, and to 

develop strategic plans to mitigate or eliminate these identified barriers. 

•	  CRCL provided diversity training to employees within the DHS Office of the Chief Information Officer.  The 

training examined diversity and inclusion within the DHS culture, addressed unconscious bias, and explored 

workforce generational differences.   In addition, CRCL provided anti-harassment training to staff from the 

Office for Bombing Prevention, National Protection and Programs Directorate.  CRCL also provided two 

anti-harassment training sessions to the Miami and Atlanta offices of the Federal Protective Services.  CRCL 

trained Equal Employment Opportunity staff from ICE on the Acceptance/Dismissal Process, with an 

emphasis on hostile work environment claims.  

•	  CRCL’s Complaints Management and Adjudication Section (CMAS): 

o	  Led a number of collaborative initiatives in FY14 and continued to strengthen partnerships 

between CRCL and other DHS Components.  Several CMAS employees were recruited to serve 

in a newly formed EEOD training cadre and conducted EEO anti-harassment and diversity 

training for managers, supervisors, and non-supervisory employees within DHS Headquarters. 

This training was often provided at the invitation of DHS Headquarters Component heads and 

was instrumental in increasing awareness of EEO laws, individuals’ rights, and managers’ 

responsibilities to maintain a workplace free from discriminatory actions and conduct;  

o	  Refined and issued guidance to EEO offices at all DHS Components regarding best practices for 

conducting effective EEO investigations; 

o	  Led Component EEO Complaint Managers quarterly meetings during which Department-wide 

guidance was shared, training on iComplaints—the enterprise EEO database and document 

management system—was offered, and best practices were identified, and; 

o	  Hosted iComplaints user update trainings for EEO personnel across the Department. These 

sessions created an opportunity for Component personnel to enhance their knowledge and 

effective use of this comprehensive tracking and reporting system. Participants also received 

individualized coaching from the DHS database administrator and Senior Complaints Manager, 

resulting in more accurate data input and also enabling Component personnel to better utilize the 

system’s advanced reporting features.  

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

9 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART E 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

•	  DHS Components provided training on disability awareness, hiring, and reasonable accommodation to 7,072 

DHS managers and Supervisors, a decline from 10,371 trained in FY13.  

•	  DHS provided 2,981 reasonable accommodations to applicants, employees, and contractors department-wide 

in FY14.  DHS Components granted 2, 200 or 73.8%, denied 119 or 4%, and categorized 666 or 22.3%  as 

“other”, i.e., closed, remanded, pending, no assistance required, and withdrawn.  This is lower than the 

reported 3,295 in FY13 due to a change in counting convention within FEMA’s accommodation case 

management system.  Of the total accommodations provided in FY14, TSA’s 810 and USCIS’s 1,149 

accounted for 69.0% of all DHS accommodations.  

•	  DHS hired one permanent employee and 13 temporary employees from the Workforce Recruitment Program 

for College Students with Disabilities. Of note, four of the 13 students hired in FY14 were from the prior 

year’s Workforce Recruitment Program database. The Workforce Recruitment Program database is available 

on-line at www.wrp.gov for federal agencies to recruit qualified students with disabilities into either 

temporary or permanent positions. 

•	 

In FY14, using Schedule A Hiring Authority under 5 CFR 213.3102, DHS hired 56 Individuals with 

Disabilities Department-wide, an increase from 55 in FY13, yet below the 100 Schedule A hires made in 

FY12.  

•	  Since June 30, 2003, when DHS became a U.S. Department of Defense, Computer/Electronic 

Accommodation Program Partner, to FY13, DHS received 2,870 accommodation solutions from the 

Computer/Electronic Accommodation Program, saving DHS $1,292,280.  During FY13, DHS experienced a 

25% increase in the number of accommodation solutions from the program.  DHS employees received 432 

accommodation solutions from the program, saving DHS $165,238. [2] 

Essential Element E - Efficiency  

•	  DHS timely submitted the annual Federal Equal Employment Opportunity Statistical Report of 

Discrimination Complaints (EEOC Form 462) to EEOC (see more details in Element F, below) and the 

Annual Notification and Federal Employee Antidiscrimination and Retaliation Act of 2002 (NO FEAR) 

Report to Congress and others. 

•	  The Complaints Management and Adjudication Section (CMAS) developed and deployed an initiative to 

benchmark Component investigations and identify best practices for conducting effective equal employment 

opportunity investigations.  As a result, CMAS refined and issued guidance to EEO offices at all DHS 

Components regarding best practices for conducting effective EEO investigations. 

•	  The CMAS remained active in FY14 by leading the Component Complaint Managers in quarterly meetings, 

during which Department-wide guidance was shared.  Training on iComplaints was offered, and best 

practices were identified.  The Complaints Management and Adjudication Section hosted two iComplaints 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

10 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART E 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

(EEO database) user update trainings for EEO personnel across the Department.  These sessions created an 

opportunity for Component personnel to enhance their knowledge and effective use of this comprehensive 

tracking and reporting system and to receive individualized coaching from the DHS database administrator 

and Senior Complaints Manager, resulting in more accurate data input and also enabling Component 

personnel to better utilize the system’s advanced reporting features. 

•	  During FY14, CRCL continued to collaborate with the Office of the Chief Human Capital Officer (OCHCO) 

and the Components to address skill gaps that were identified in an OPM report concerning the competencies 

of DHS employees who work in the 0260 occupational series.  CRCL conducted a root cause analysis to 

determine why the gaps exist and developed an operational plan to address the skill of critical thinking.  

•	 

In FY14, DHS completed 940 Equal Employment Opportunity investigations, an increase from 871 in FY13. 

The percentage of timely investigated complaints remained steady at 70% in FY14 and FY13. 

•	  With respect to adjudication, in FY14, the overall percentage of timely merit Final Agency Decision (FAD) 

issuances increased between FY13 (41 percent) and FY14 (53 percent), while overall numbers dropped both 

in terms of total FADs issued and total FADs timely issued when comparing those two years.  Interestingly, 

during FY14, CRCL received only 377 requests for merit FAD (301 issued), compared with 512 incoming 

requests during FY13 (455 issued).  CRCL has no direct control over the number of cases received because 

this is determined by the volume of complaint filings across the Department in the fiscal year along with 

Complainants’ decisions to elect agency merit FADs.  CRCL routinely monitors formal complaint activity 

and anticipates the likely influx of merit FAD requests. 

•	  CRCL received comments and concurrence from Components on a white paper that is expected to lead to the 

implementation of a DHS-wide Alternative Dispute Resolution program.  The white paper will be presented 

to the Deputy Secretary in FY15.  The proposal includes hiring a program manager at the Headquarters level, 

who will be responsible for promoting the program and managing a cadre of internal mediators.  The program 

is expected to result in a decrease in formal filings of Equal Employment Opportunity complaints.  In FY14, 

CRCL received authorization to hire an ADR Program Manager and expects to make a hire in FY15. 

Essential Element F - Responsiveness and Legal Compliance 

DHS’s goal is full compliance with equal employment opportunity statutes, regulations, policy guidance, and 
other written instructions.  Agency personnel are accountable for timely compliance with orders issued by EEOC 
Administrative Judges, and it has implemented procedures in place to ensure timely completion of ordered 
corrective actions and timely submission of compliance reports. 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

11 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART E 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act 

The Office of Accessible Systems & Technologies (OAST) implements Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act of 
1973, as amended.  Accomplishments during FY14 included:  

•	  Processed 2,108 DHS Accessibility Helpdesk requests across DHS and several federal agencies and public 

entities using its Accessibility Compliance Management System a Web-based program to track accessibility 

related assistance. 

•	  Remediated 28,878 pages (632 document files) of content consisting of forms, policy documents, newsletters, 

Frequently Asked Questions, memoranda, schedules, budget files, handbooks, flyers, schedules, and reports 

across DHS and its Components.  The Accessibility Helpdesk serves as a single point of contact for all 

electronic and information technology accessibility and accommodation needs. 

•	  Completed the final phase of deployment of the online trusted tester training course.  Federal Acquisition 

Certification (FAC) 049 was adopted as the federal-wide introductory course for Section 508 compliance and 

is open to all federal employees.  The course is also included as a continuing learning model for Federal 

Acquisition Certification of Contracting Officer’s Representatives (CORs).  

•	  Trained 1,542 personnel across DHS and its Components and other government agencies through the Section 

508 Awareness Training Program. To date, the Office has graduated 229 testers through the DHS Trusted 

Tester Certification Program. 

•	  Performed Section 508 compliance reviews for four change control boards and for major information 

technology procurements.  Total reviews performed exceeded 5,184 and modifications made as a result of 

Office of Accessible Systems & Technology governance totaled 177. 

•	  Conducted 52 initial accessibility reviews for IT programs on the DHS Major Acquisition Oversight List 

(MAOL).  These reviews allowed the Accessibility Compliance Center of Excellence (ACCOE) to introduce 

Section 508 accessibility standards and proven best practices as well as successfully inventoried 89 of 90 IT 

programs to determine their accessibility status and needs. 

•	  Tested 114 IT and web-based applications that were submitted through the DHS Accessibility Helpdesk. 

•	  Processed 85 reasonable accommodation requests. These requests were for technology- related 

accommodations only.  HQ - EEO Disability Program Manager processed all other accommodation requests. 

•	  Began the internal pilot of a draft mobile test process for IOS and Android. 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

12 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART E 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

Workforce Profile and Trend Analysis 

With 179,256 permanent civilian employees, DHS is the third-largest Executive Branch agency.  The total 
permanent workforce decreased by 4,404 employees, or 2.4%, during FY14.  

The DHS workforce trend analysis discussed below was conducted on the permanent employee workforce, as this 
is the only segment that can be meaningfully tracked over time.  Temporary employees are hired for temporary 
needs, their separation is pre-destined, and their makeup can change significantly from year to year, which makes 
discussing temporary trends in Ethnicity/Race Indicator, Sex, and disability less relevant to our analysis of 
employees as they move through the human capital lifecycle.  

Interpreting the tables below is done with parity, as the idealized outcome.  In a world of parity, all groups are 
expected to move through the human capital lifecycle in proportion to their size.  In the tables below, parity would 
result if each row in the table contained essentially the same number all the way across the board.  For example, if 
Black males are 7.2% of the permanent DHS workforce in FY14, they should be 7.2% of each of the following: 
attrition, promotions, low pay grades, middle pay grades, and high pay grades.  If this is not occurring, it 
constitutes a trigger and is suggestive of a possible equal employment barrier.  Multiple years of data are provided 
to give a glimpse into the trends for each particular group.  Successful human capital strategies can minimally 
affect the workforce in a particular year.  Therefore, analysis of several years of data is often useful in these types 
of assessments. 

Additionally, both National Civilian Labor Force and Relevant Civilian Labor Force statistics are provided as 
benchmarks.  The National Civilian Labor Force consists of all persons over 16 years of age, who are not 
institutionalized or on active duty in the armed forces, and who either have a job or want a job.   The Relevant 
Civilian Labor Force is a weighted average of demographic statistics pertaining only to occupations seen within 
DHS. 

Black Males – 7.2% of DHS, 5.5% of National Civilian Labor Force, 4.9% of Relevant Civilian Labor
 
Force
 

% of 
Permanent 
DHS 
Workforce 

7.1% 

6.8% 

6.7% 

7.0% 

7.1% 

7.1% 

7.2% 

7.2% 

Year 

FY07 

FY08 

FY09 

FY10 

FY11 

FY12 

FY13 

FY14 

% of 
Hires 

% of 
Attrition 

% of 
Promotions 

7.6% 

6.6% 

6.4% 

8.2% 

8.7% 

7.2% 

9.1% 

9.2% 

9.7% 

8.6% 

7.4% 

7.8% 

8.0% 

8.3% 

8.0% 

8.1% 

8.1% 

6.2% 

5.8% 

5.1% 

5.4% 

5.6% 

6.2% 

6.8% 

% of 
Grades 1-
4 

11.7% 

10.0% 

9.9% 

10.7% 

10.3% 

9.4% 

10.5% 

10.4% 

Pay level 

% of 
Grades 5-9 

% of Grades 
10-12 

% of Grades 
13-15 

8.7% 

8.1% 

8.1% 

8.6% 

9.0% 

9.3% 

9.4% 

9.6% 

4.8% 

4.8% 

4.8% 

5.3% 

5.4% 

5.4% 

4.9% 

5.2% 

5.2% 

5.4% 

5.6% 

5.7% 

5.8% 

5.9% 

5.7% 

6.5% 

% of 
Executive 
and Senior 
Leader 

4.3% 

4.7% 

5.2% 

6.2% 

6.8% 

6.6% 

6.7% 

6.4% 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

13 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART E 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

The workforce participation rate of Black males has been relatively stable over the past seven Fiscal Years, and 
remains well above the participation rate seen in the National Civilian Labor Force. 

Although Black males are increasing their presence in higher grade levels over time, the lower than expected 
promotion rate suggests a possible barrier to upward mobility for this group. 

Black Females – 7.9% of  DHS, 6.5% of National Civilian Labor Force, 6.3% of Relevant Civilian Labor  
Force  

Year 

% of Permanent 
DHS Workforce 

 % of 
Hires 

 % of 
Attrition  

 % of 
Promotions 

 % of 
Grades 1-
4 

 % of 
Grades 5-
9 

Pay level  
 % of 
Grades 
10-12 

 % of 
Grades 
13-15 

% of Executive 
and Senior 
Leader  

FY07 

FY08 

FY09 

FY10 

FY11 

FY12 

FY13 

FY14 

7.7% 

7.6% 

7.4% 

7.5% 

7.7% 

7.7% 

7.8% 

7.9% 

9.9% 

8.5% 

6.5% 

8.5% 

9.7% 

9.8% 

10.7% 

11.0% 

10.1% 

9.9% 

8.4% 

9.9% 

8.8% 

9.4% 

9.5% 

9.2% 

8.4% 

6.4% 

6.9% 

4.8% 

6.0% 

6.1% 

7.1% 

8.2% 

14.5%  

13.7%  

14.3%  

12.9%  

12.1%  

12.9%  

12.8%  

15.3%  

9.5%  

8.9%  

8.8%  

9.9%  

10.6%  

11.1%  

10.3%  

11.5%  

4.8%  

4.7%  

4.7%  

5.0%  

4.9%  

4.8%  

4.7%  

4.6%  

6.1%  

6.4%  

6.5%  

6.5%  

6.6%  

6.7%  

6.8%  

6.6%  

1.7%  

1.4%  

2.4%  

3.3%  

3.5%  

3.8%  

3.6%  

2.8%  

The workforce participation rate of Black females has been relatively stable over the past seven Fiscal Years, and 
remains well above the participation rate seen in the National Civilian Labor Force. 

While Black Females are being hired at a rate that is higher than their onboard workforce participation rate, they 
are separating at a higher than expected rate as well.  This is the case for each year in the time period provided. 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

14 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART E 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

Hispanic Males – 15.7% of DHS, 5.2% of National Civilian Labor Force, 5.0% of Relevant Civilian Labor
 
Force
 

Year 

% of Permanent 
DHS Workforce 

 % of 
Hires 

 % of 
Attrition  

 % of 
Promotions 

 % of 
Grades 1-
4 

 % of 
Grades 5-
9 

Pay level 
 % of 
Grades 
10-12 

 % of 
Grades 
13-15 

% of Executive 
and Senior 
Leader  

FY07 

FY08 

FY09 

FY10 

FY11 

FY12 

FY13 

FY14 

14.4% 

14.5% 

14.6% 

15.5%

15.6%

15.5%

15.6%

15.7%

16.4% 

15.5% 

16.6% 

11.3% 

13.3% 

10.1% 

11.0% 

11.1% 

10.3% 

12.3% 

13.5% 

10.2%

10.8%

10.4% 

10.4% 

10.8% 

14.1% 

18.5% 

19.8% 

25.7% 

20.7% 

18.6% 

15.8% 

12.6% 

8.4% 

10.1% 

10.0% 

11.3% 

15.8% 

14.9% 

13.1% 

11.7% 

13.7% 

14.2% 

14.1% 

13.1% 

11.7% 

10.9% 

10.8% 

7.2% 

21.3% 

21.1% 

21.3% 

22.8% 

23.1% 

23.4% 

24.9% 

24.7% 

7.9% 

7.9% 

7.9% 

10.9% 

11.3% 

11.4% 

11.8% 

11.4% 

5.0% 

5.1% 

4.3% 

4.1% 

4.5% 

5.1% 

4.5% 

4.0% 

The workforce participation rate for Hispanic males is significantly above the rate seen in the National Civilian 
Labor Force. 

This is largely due to DHS’s law enforcement presence in southern border states.  Hispanics constitute 30% of 
CBP Officers, almost half of Border Patrol Agents, and a quarter of Immigration Enforcement Agents.  CBP 
Officers and Border Patrol Agents are required to be fluent in Spanish for initial placements along the southern 
border, Florida, and in Puerto Rico, a requirement that is not present in the standard relevant civilian labor force 
comparison.  This job requirement greatly increases Hispanic representation in these occupations. 

The hiring of Hispanic males has fallen off in recent years, largely due to recent hires being concentrated in the 
Washington, D.C. area, while hires on the southern border have declined.  The attrition rate continues to remain 
well below the workforce representation rate. 

Hispanic males’ promotion rates began to fall into balance with their workforce representation rate after years of 
disproportionately high promotions, and movement from the GS 10-12 grades into the GS 13-15 grades is 
occurring.  For example, as the above chart indicates, in FY14, Hispanic males comprised 11.4% of grades 13-15,  
much higher than in FY07, when Hispanic males comprised 14.4% of the permanent workforce, yet only 7.9% 
were in grades 13-15. 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

15 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART E 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

Hispanic Females – 5.5% of DHS, 4.8% of National Civilian Labor Force, 4.0% of Relevant Civilian Labor 

Force
 

Year 

% of Permanent 
DHS Workforce 

 % of 
Hires 

 % of 
Attrition  

 % of 
Promotions 

Pay level 

 % of 
Grades 1-
4 

 % of 
Grades 5-
9 

 % of 
Grades 
10-12 

 % of 
Grades 
13-15 

 % of 
Executive and 
Senior Leader  

FY07 

FY08 

FY09 

FY10 

FY11 

FY12 

FY13 

FY14 

4.8% 

4.9% 

4.8% 

5.2% 

5.2% 

5.3% 

5.5% 

5.5% 

5.2% 

6.2% 

4.5% 

4.0% 

5.2% 

6.1% 

7.6% 

7.8% 

4.4% 

5.1% 

4.8% 

4.1% 

4.5% 

5.4% 

5.4% 

6.1% 

5.4% 

5.0% 

5.4% 

5.6% 

5.1% 

5.0% 

5.5% 

6.0% 

6.4%  

8.3%  

8.3%  

6.8%  

8.1%  

9.6%  

9.9%  

11.6%  

5.7%  

5.4%  

5.6%  

6.6%  

6.6%  

6.6%  

6.3%  

7.2%  

4.8%  

4.7%  

4.6%  

5.2%  

5.1%  

5.1%  

5.2%  

5.2%  

2.8%  

2.9%  

2.9%  

3.2%  

3.2%  

3.2%  

3.5%  

3.3%  

0.9%  

0.6%  

1.2%  

1.0%  

1.2%  

1.2%  

1.5%  

1.9%  

The workforce participation rate for Hispanic females is slightly above the rate in the National Civilian Labor 
Force. 

The workforce participation rate has increased in each of the last seven fiscal years as hires tended to outpace 
attrition, although attrition has increased in FY14.  Hispanic females are being promoted at a rate that is at or 
above what would be expected given their workforce participation rate. 

Hispanic females are significantly overrepresented at the lowest grade levels.  For instance, almost 40% of 
Hispanic Females are in pay bands that are at the GS-8 equivalent level or lower. 

Representation at the highest grade levels has, however, been trending towards parity over the past four years. 

Asian Males – 3.4% of DHS, 2.0% of National Civilian Labor Force, 2.7% of Relevant Civilian Labor
 
Force
 

Year 

% of Permanent 
DHS Workforce 

% of 
Hires 

% of 
Attrition 

% of 
Promotions 

% of 
Grades 1-
4 

% of 
Grades 5-
9 

Pay level 
% of 
Grades 
10-12 

% of 
Grades 
13-15 

% of Executive 
and Senior 
Leader 

FY07 

FY08 

FY09 

FY10 

FY11 

FY12 

FY13 

FY14 

3.0% 

2.9% 

2.8% 

3.2% 

3.2% 

3.3% 

3.3% 

3.4% 

2.4% 

2.3% 

2.6% 

2.8% 

3.3% 

3.2% 

3.8% 

4.1% 

2.5% 

2.3% 

2.1% 

2.5% 

2.8% 

2.6% 

2.7% 

2.7% 

3.5% 

3.0% 

2.9% 

3.6% 

3.2% 

3.3% 

3.3% 

3.3% 

2.3% 

2.1% 

2.2% 

2.9% 

3.5% 

3.5% 

3.6% 

4.1% 

3.2% 

3.2% 

3.1% 

3.3% 

3.2% 

3.2% 

3.2% 

3.5% 

3.3% 

3.3% 

3.1% 

3.7% 

3.7% 

3.8% 

3.8% 

3.8% 

2.2% 

2.2% 

2.2% 

2.5% 

2.6% 

2.7% 

2.8% 

2.8% 

1.3% 

1.2% 

1.4% 

1.5% 

1.1% 

1.4% 

1.5% 

1.2% 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

16 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART E 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

Asian males are represented in the DHS permanent workforce at a rate well above that seen in the National 
Civilian Labor Force.  Their workforce participation rate has increased over the past seven fiscal years, which is 
due to lower than expected attrition rates. 

Asian males have been promoted at rates consistent with their workforce size, are most concentrated in the middle 
pay levels, and their presence at the GS 13-15 levels has been increasing in recent years. 

Nearly 50% of all Asian males are either in the Transportation Security Officers position at TSA or the CBP 
Officer position at CBP. 

Asian Females – 1.7% of DHS, 1.9% of National Civilian Labor Force, 2.0% of Relevant Civilian Labor  
Force  

Year 

% of Permanent 
DHS Workforce 

 % of 
Hires 

 % of 
Attrition  

 % of 
Promotions 

 % of 
Grades 1-
4 

 % of 
Grades 5-
9 

Pay level  
 % of 
Grades 
10-12 

 % of 
Grades 
13-15 

% of Executive 
and Senior 
Leader  

FY07 

FY08 

FY09 

FY10 

FY11 

FY12 

FY13 

FY14 

1.5% 

1.5% 

1.5% 

1.6% 

1.6% 

1.6% 

1.7% 

1.7% 

1.1% 

1.3% 

1.3% 

1.5% 

1.6% 

1.9% 

1.8% 

2.3% 

1.1% 

1.0% 

1.1% 

1.4% 

1.2% 

1.5% 

1.6% 

1.4% 

1.6% 

1.4% 

1.5% 

1.2% 

1.4% 

1.6% 

1.7% 

1.8% 

1.2%  

1.2%  

1.2%  

1.2%  

1.4%  

1.6%  

1.7%  

2.4%  

1.7%  

1.7%  

1.6%  

1.7%  

1.7%  

1.8%  

1.6%  

1.9%  

1.4%  

1.5%  

1.4%  

1.6%  

1.5%  

1.5%  

1.6%  

1.5%  

1.3%  

1.4%  

1.4%  

1.5%  

1.6%  

1.7%  

1.8%  

1.7%  

0.6%  

0.9%  

1.2%  

1.3%  

1.2%  

1.2%  

1.2%  

1.1%  

Asian females comprise the only major minority group whose onboard participation rate is lower than the 
National Civilian Labor Force.  Its participation rate continues to slowly increase. 

Hiring rates in FY13 and FY14, which have exceeded attrition rates, are responsible for the gradual increase in 
Asian female representation over time. 

Asian females are being promoted at rates roughly consistent with their workforce size, and they are spread fairly 
proportionately throughout the GS pay grades.  Their executive representation, while still low, has doubled since 
FY07. 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

17 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART E 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

Native American Males  – 0.64% of DHS, 0.6% of National Civilian Labor Force, 0.6% of Relevant 
Civilian Labor Force 

Year 

% of Permanent 
DHS Workforce 

 % of 
Hires 

 % of 
Attrition  

 % of 
Promotions 

Pay level  

 % of 
Grades 1-
4 

 % of 
Grades 5-
9 

 % of 
Grades 
10-12 

 % of 
Grades 
13-15 

FY07 

FY08 

FY09 

FY10 

FY11 

FY12 

FY13 

FY14 

0.52% 

0.49% 

0.62% 

0.70% 

0.68% 

0.66% 

0.66% 

0.64% 

0.57% 

0.50% 

0.89% 

0.56% 

0.52% 

0.44% 

0.51% 

0.44% 

0.62% 

0.61% 

0.65% 

0.66% 

0.88% 

0.70% 

0.70% 

0.89% 

0.53% 

0.57% 

0.57% 

0.72% 

0.64% 

0.65% 

0.55% 

0.49% 

0.84%  

0.73%  

0.77%  

0.75%  

0.51%  

0.46%  

0.46%  

0.28%  

0.49%  

0.48%  

0.66%  

0.64%  

0.62%  

0.59%  

0.61%  

0.54%  

0.49%  

0.45%  

0.55%  

0.70%  

0.70%  

0.69%  

0.74%  

0.72%  

0.49%  

0.47%  

0.55%  

0.75%  

0.73%  

0.71%  

0.66%  

0.68%  

 % of 
Executive 
and Senior 
Leader  

0.37%  

0.16%  

0.15%  

0.30%  

0.41%  

0.52%  

0.64%  

0.74%  

Native American males have approximately the same workforce participation rate as that seen in the National 
Civilian Labor Force.  

Hires, attrition, and promotions for Native American males vary in ways that are not statistically significant, 
which is to be expected when dealing with such a small population. 

Native American males are spread roughly, as expected, throughout the middle range of pay grades, and are 
underrepresented at the extremes. 

Caution should be used when drawing inferences from the data, due to the extremely small size of the population, 
which can produce large swings, may not be statistically significant. 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

18 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART E 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

Native American Females – 0.30% of DHS, 0.5% of  National Civilian Labor Force, 0.6% of Relevant 
Civilian Labor  Force  

Year 

% of Permanent 
DHS Workforce 

 % of 
Hires 

 % of 
Attrition  

 % of 
Promotions 

Pay level

 % of 
Grades 1-
4 

 % of 
Grades 5-
9 

 % of 
Grades 
10-12 

 % of 
Grades 
13-15 

FY07 

FY08 

FY09 

FY10 

FY11 

FY12 

FY13 

FY14 

0.31% 

0.32% 

0.35% 

0.34% 

0.32% 

0.32% 

0.31% 

0.30% 

0.52% 

0.48% 

0.28% 

0.27% 

0.26% 

0.40% 

0.37% 

0.33% 

0.50% 

0.54% 

0.45% 

0.50% 

0.43% 

0.47% 

0.47% 

0.55% 

0.36% 

0.25% 

0.33% 

0.25% 

0.30% 

0.22% 

0.28% 

0.28% 

0.85%  

0.77%  

0.86%  

0.64%  

0.33%  

0.39%  

0.29%  

0.24%  

0.38%  

0.38%  

0.45%  

0.49%  

0.52%  

0.52%  

0.47%  

0.48%  

0.17%  

0.17%  

0.19%  

0.23%  

0.21%  

0.21%  

0.19%  

0.18%  

0.18%  

0.19%  

0.21%  

0.23%  

0.23%  

0.22%  

0.22%  

0.23%  

 % of 
Executive 
and Senior 
Leader  

0.00%  

0.00%  

0.00%  

0.00%  

0.00%  

0.00%  

0.00%  

0.12%  

Native American females have a lower workforce representation rate than that seen in the National Civilian Labor 
Force.  Their attrition rate is higher than expected, given their workforce representation rate. 

Native American females are disproportionately concentrated at lower pay levels.  This, along with lower-than-
expected promotion rates, could indicate a lack of upward mobility and explain the higher-than-expected 
separation rate.  Caution should be used when drawing inferences from the data, due to the extremely small size 
of the population, which can produce large swings that may not be statistically significant. 

Pacific  Islander Males –  0.31% of DHS, 0.1% of National Civilian Labor Force and Relevant Civilian 

Labor Force 
 

Year 

% of Permanent 
DHS Workforce 

 % of 
Hires 

 % of 
Attrition  

 % of 
Promotions 

Pay level  

 % of 
Grades 1-
4 

 % of 
Grades 5-
9 

 % of 
Grades 
10-12 

 % of 
Grades 
13-15 

 % of 
Executive 
and Senior 
Leader  

FY07 

FY08 

FY09 

FY10 

FY11 

FY12 

FY13 

FY14 

0.12% 

0.10% 

0.17% 

0.21% 

0.25% 

0.27% 

0.29% 

0.31% 

0.19% 

0.06% 

0.16% 

0.39% 

0.44% 

0.47% 

0.55% 

0.77% 

0.17% 

0.11% 

0.06% 

0.08% 

0.17% 

0.32% 

0.26% 

0.34% 

0.22% 

0.18% 

0.16% 

0.23% 

0.20% 

0.26% 

0.36% 

0.27% 

0.1%  

0.1%  

0.1%  

0.3%  

0.7%  

0.7%  

0.7%  

0.9%  

0.2%  

0.2%  

0.2%  

0.2%  

0.2%  

0.3%  

0.3%  

0.4%  

0.1%  

0.1%  

0.2%  

0.2%  

0.2%  

0.2%  

0.3%  

0.3%  

0.0%  

0.0%  

0.1%  

0.1%  

0.1%  

0.1%  

0.1%  

0.2%  

0.0%  

0.0%  

0.0%  

0.1%  

0.4%  

0.4%  

0.4%  

0.4%  

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

19 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART E 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

As of FY13, Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander males have three times the representation seen in the National 
Civilian Labor Force.  The recent increase in representation is due to hiring; additionally, the attrition rate has 
remained relatively low in most fiscal years. 

Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander males are overrepresented in the lowest pay grades and the Executive grades 
promotion rates fluctuate, which is common with very small populations. 

Caution should be used when drawing inferences from the data, due to the extremely small size of the population, 
which can produce large swings that may not be statistically significant. 

Pac.  Islander Females  –  0.18% of DHS, 0.1% of National Civilian Labor Force and Relevant Civilian 
Labor Force  

 % of 
Permanent 
 DHS 
Workforce  

 % of 
Hires 

 % of 
Attrition  

 % of 
Promotions 

 % of 
Grades 1-
4 

 % of 
Grades 5-9 

% of Grades 
10-12 

% of Grades 
13-15 

Pay level  

0.11% 

0.10% 

0.12% 

0.12% 

0.15% 

0.17% 

0.18% 

0.18% 

0.11% 

0.03% 

0.06% 

0.13% 

0.30% 

0.39% 

0.52% 

0.23% 

0.14% 

0.05% 

0.05% 

0.08% 

0.12% 

0.17% 

0.30% 

0.16% 

0.15% 

0.12% 

0.09% 

0.08% 

0.11% 

0.12% 

0.15% 

0.15% 

0.2%  

0.1%  

0.1%  

0.2%  

0.4%  

0.6%  

0.7%  

0.4%  

0.2%  

0.2%  

0.2%  

0.2%  

0.2%  

0.3%  

0.3%  

0.4%  

0.1%  

0.0%  

0.1%  

0.1%  

0.1%  

0.1%  

0.1%  

0.1%  

0.0%  

0.0%  

0.0%  

0.0%  

0.1%  

0.1%  

0.1%  

0.1%  

 % of 
Executive 
and Senior 
Leader  

0.0%  

0.0%  

0.0%  

0.0%  

0.0%  

0.0%  

0.0%  

0.0%  

Year 

FY07 

FY08 

FY09 

FY10 

FY11 

FY12 

FY13 

FY14 

As of FY13, Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander females’ representation rate exceeded that in the National Civilian 
Labor Force.  The recent increase in representation is due to hiring; moreover, the attrition rate stayed relatively 
low in most fiscal years. 

Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander females are overrepresented in the lowest pay grades and promotion rates have 
been lower than expected for the past five years. 

Caution should be used when drawing inferences from the data, due to the extremely small size of the population, 
which can produce large swings that may not be statistically significant. 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

20 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART E 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

White Males – 40.6% of  DHS, 38.3% of  National  Civilian Labor Force, 43.3% of Relevant Civilian 
Labor Force  

Pay level  

Year 

% of Permanent 
DHS Workforce 

 % of 
Hires 

 % of 
Attrition  

 % of 
Promotions 

 % of 
Grades 1-
4 

 % of 
Grades 
 5-9 

 % of 
Grades 
10-12 

 % of 
Grades 
13-15 

 % of 
Executive and 
Senior Leader  

FY07 

FY08 

FY09 

FY10 

FY11 

FY12 

FY13 

FY14 

43.0% 

43.0% 

42.9% 

41.5% 

41.2% 

41.0% 

40.7% 

40.6% 

37.6% 

39.1% 

42.4% 

44.7% 

40.0% 

38.6% 

35.3% 

35.3% 

40.5% 

39.9% 

41.8% 

41.5% 

41.3% 

40.0% 

39.3% 

38.7% 

39.5% 

41.5% 

40.1% 

39.9% 

41.9% 

43.2% 

42.3% 

41.4% 

31.8%  

31.0%  

29.4%  

32.2%  

30.7%  

26.9%  

28.1%  

22.9%  

36.8%  

37.8%  

37.7%  

35.4%  

34.9%  

34.3%  

37.2%  

32.9%  

45.1%  

45.3%  

44.8%  

41.4%  

41.6%  

41.9%  

41.1%  

41.5%  

55.1%  

54.0%  

53.0%  

51.0%  

50.3%  

49.9%  

48.8%  

49.7%  

65.6%  

65.8%  

62.7%  

59.9%  

58.6%  

58.7%  

58.1%  

59.5%  

Currently, the White male representation rate at DHS has been declining consistently across time, slightly 
exceeding that seen in the National Civilian Labor Force, and is below the Relevant Civilian Labor Force.  The 
hiring, attrition, and promotion rates are roughly in-line with the overall workforce representation rate and are not 
otherwise remarkable. 

White males are overly concentrated at higher pay levels and under-concentrated at lower pay levels.  However, 
efforts to enhance recruiting of a diverse population have reduced the pay grade disparity for White males.  It is 
also true that as White males retire, it is common for their replacement to come from a more diverse feeder pool. 

White females – 16.2% of  DHS, 34.0% of  National Civilian  Labor Force, 30.1% of  Relevant  Civilian 
 
Labor Force 
 

Pay level  

Year 

% of Permanent 
DHS Workforce 

 % of 
Hires 

 % of 
Attrition  

 % of 
Promotions 

 % of 
Grades 1-
4 

 % of 
Grades 5-
9 

 % of 
Grades 
10-12 

 % of 
Grades 
13-15 

 % of 
Executive and 
Senior Leader  

FY07 

FY08 

FY09 

FY10 

FY11 

FY12 

FY13 

FY14 

17.5% 

17.8% 

17.7% 

16.9% 

16.6% 

16.6% 

16.4% 

16.2% 

18.4% 

19.2% 

17.2% 

17.1% 

16.0% 

20.6% 

17.9% 

16.5% 

19.8% 

19.7% 

19.6% 

20.8% 

20.7% 

20.2% 

20.9% 

20.5% 

18.0% 

16.7% 

16.1% 

12.4% 

14.7% 

14.9% 

16.3% 

18.4% 

21.7%  

21.8%  

22.4%  

19.3%  

15.2%  

18.0%  

17.0%  

15.2%  

19.5%  

19.5%  

19.2%  

19.5%  

20.4%  

20.7%  

19.2%  

20.2%  

13.7%  

13.9%  

14.1%  

13.4%  

12.9%  

12.5%  

12.0%  

11.8%  

18.7%  

19.1%  

19.2%  

17.4%  

17.1%  

17.1%  

17.4%  

16.5%  

20.3%  

20.1%  

21.4%  

22.2%  

22.2%  

21.1%  

21.5%  

21.6%  

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

21 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART E 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

The White females’ participation rate is significantly less at DHS, relative to the rate in the National Civilian 
Labor Force.  The representation of White females decreased as a percentage of the overall workforce for the past 
six years, due to a higher-than-expected attrition rate, which reached an all-time high in FY13.  FY14 marks the 
first year that White females’ promotion rate is not below their participation rate.  Lower-than-expected 
promotion rates could reflect a possible barrier to upward mobility. 

White females tend to be concentrated at both ends of the pay spectrum, with few White females in the middle GS 
10-12 grades.  Their concentration is highest at the Executive/Senior Leader pay grades. 

Individuals With Disabilities  –  5.4% of DHS, 8.6% of Federal Government  

Pay level  

Year 

% of Permanent 
DHS Workforce 

 % of 
Hires 

 % of 
Attrition  

 % of 
Promotions 

 % of 
Grades 
 1-4 

 % of 
Grades 
 5-9 

 % of 
Grades 
10-12 

 % of 
Grades 
13-15 

% of Executive 
and Senior 
Leaders  

FY07 

FY08 

FY09 

FY10 

FY11 

FY12 

FY13 

FY14 

4.0% 

3.9% 

4.0% 

4.1% 

4.3% 

4.6% 

4.7% 

5.4% 

3.0% 

3.8% 

4.0% 

4.7% 

4.7% 

5.9% 

5.6% 

5.0% 

4.2% 

4.5% 

4.9% 

6.1% 

6.3% 

6.1% 

6.0% 

6.8% 

4.7% 

3.1% 

3.1% 

2.6% 

2.8% 

3.2% 

3.8% 

4.2% 

3.1%  

3.6%  

4.0%  

3.4%  

2.6%  

2.5%  

2.4%  

2.8%  

5.5%  

5.0%  

4.8%  

4.9%  

5.3%  

5.8%  

5.6%  

5.8%  

2.9%  

2.9%  

3.2%  

3.3%  

3.5%  

3.7%  

4.0%  

4.3%  

3.1%  

3.3%  

3.7%  

3.7%  

4.1%  

4.6%  

4.9%  

4.8%  

3.9%  

3.7%  

3.7%  

4.1%  

4.5%  

4.6%  

4.3%  

4.6%  

The percentage of the DHS workforce that self-identifies as having a disability is lower than the average seen in 
the entire federal workforce.  Within non-Law Enforcement positions, the percentage of the workforce with a 
disability goes up by roughly one full percentage point, but this is still below the federal average of 8.6%. 

Employees with disabilities separated at higher rates than their workforce representation rate—common 
throughout both federal and private sectors. 

Promotion rates in each of the past six years were lower than expected given the size of the onboard disabled 
workforce.  Employees with disabilities are fairly evenly dispersed across the pay grade levels. 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

22 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART E 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

Individuals With Targeted Disabilities  –  0.42% of DHS, 1.02% of Federal Government  

Pay level  

Year  

% of Permanent  
DHS Workforce  

% of  
Hires  

% of  
Attrition  

% of  
Promotions  

% of  
Grades 
1-4  

% of  
Grades 
5-9  

% of  
Grades 
10-12  

% of  
Grades 
13-15  

% of Executive 
and Senior  
Leaders  

FY07  

FY08  

FY09  

FY10  

FY11  

FY12  

FY13  

FY14  

0.39%

0.37%  

0.37%  

0.38%  

0.38%  

0.37%  

0.37%  

0.42%  

0.23%  

0.32%  

0.32%  

0.33%  

0.30%  

0.36%  

0.45%  

0.23%  

0.34%  

0.50%  

0.41% 

0.50%  

0.42%  

0.55%  

0.57%  

0.56%  

0.38%  

0.25%  

0.25%  

0.22%  

0.25%  

0.24%  

0.29%  

0.32%  

0.43%  

0.45%  

0.54%  

0.47%  

0.35%  

0.29%  

0.26%  

0.48%  

0.56%  

0.50%  

0.48%  

0.53%  

0.58%  

0.60%  

0.53%  

0.55%  

0.26%  

0.26%  

0.28%  

0.30%  

0.28%  

0.29%  

0.30%  

0.33%  

0.20%  

0.21%  

0.24%  

0.23%  

0.26%  

0.23%  

0.25%  

0.26%  

0.18%  

0.16%  

0.00%  

0.00%  

0.14%  

0.26%  

0.26%  

0.25%  

The percentage of the DHS workforce that self-identifies as having a targeted disability1
seen in the entire Federal workforce.  Within non-Law Enforcement positions, the percentage of workers with 
targeted disabilities increases by roughly a tenth of a percentage point.  This is still less than the 1.02% across the 
federal government, and well below the federal government goal of 2%.  

 is lower than the average 

High rates of separation, concentration at lower pay levels, and low rates of promotions characterize this 
population.  In FY14, a resurvey of the workforce was conducted at the U.S. Coast Guard, during which many 
Coast Guard employees’ status changed to targeted disabled.  This resurvey is responsible for the overall increase 
in the workforce participation rate in FY14. 

The tables above provide a high-level overview of the DHS workforce.  Similar tables were created for the DHS 
Components, each of which received an individually tailored briefing on their workforce and data triggers after 
last year’s reporting season. 

1 Targeted Disabilities, a subset of reportable disabilities, are considered the most severe disabilities. As a matter of policy, 
the federal government has initiated a special emphasis on recruiting, hiring and retaining people with targeted disabilities. 
Categories on OPM’s Standard Form 256 which make up targeted disabilities include: deafness, blindness, missing 
extremities, partial or complete paralysis, epilepsy, severe intellectual disability, psychiatric disability, and dwarfism.  See 
http://www.opm.gov/policy-data-oversight/disability-employment/reference-materials/sf256.pdf for the form itself. 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

23 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
                                                      
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART E 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

The Best Places to Work in the Federal Government 

DHS administered the U.S. Office of Personnel Management Survey between 2005 and 2014.  DHS ranked last 
among all large Departments and Agencies in 2013, and the 2014 results were even less positive for DHS than its 
2013 results. 

The overall DHS score is largely driven by TSA and CBP Components, which make up roughly 60 percent of all 
DHS respondents.  There are other DHS Components that show higher employee satisfaction, and it is clear that 
satisfaction within Components can vary greatly depending on occupation, location, job tenure, and other factors.  
Race and gender are not found to be great predictors of satisfaction.  Disability status, however, is a strong 
predictor, with DHS employees with disabilities providing more negative responses to almost all items in the 
survey.  

New Area of Focus – Women in Law Enforcement 

Women occupy approximately 8.4% of Law Enforcement positions at DHS.  This female participation rate is 
substantially less than what is seen in law enforcement positions across the Federal government, and even less 
than that seen in the Civilian Labor Force’s benchmark for criminal investigators.  In the spring of 2014, DHS 
commenced a study to better understand the causes of the low female representation rate within law enforcement 
positions.  A blended approach was used, which incorporated personnel data, focus groups, and one-on-one 
interviews.  The report is expected to be completed for the Secretary of DHS during 2015. 

Data Sources 

The workforce numbers used in this report were generated by the DHS’ new Oracle-based AXIS database, and 
were based on an extraction from the National Finance Center’s data for Pay Period 19, which ended on October 
4, 2014.  DHS employees voluntarily submitted all race, national origin, gender, and disability data relied upon in 
this report.  Statistics on Individuals with Disabilities/Individuals with Targeted Disabilities in the federal 
government were obtained within the U.S. Office of Personnel Management’s 2013 Report on the Employment of 
Individuals with Disabilities in the Federal Executive Branch, found at: http://www.Office of Personnel 
Management.gov/policy-data-oversight/diversity-and-inclusion/reports/disability-report-fy2012.pdf. 

National Civilian Labor Force statistics were compiled using the Census Bureau’s American Community Survey 
data.  Relevant Civilian Labor Force statistics were compiled using the American Community Survey data, along 
with the distribution of DHS personnel across occupations. 

Equal Employment Opportunity complaint numbers were obtained via complaint data collected by DHS and its 
Components and stored in iComplaints, the Departmental case management software program.  Equal 
Employment Opportunity Specialists at the DHS Components enter information into the program, and the 
program has the ability to process ad hoc queries for evaluating all aspects of the Equal Employment Opportunity 
case management process. 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

24 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART E 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

Federal Employee Viewpoint Survey data pertaining to DHS employees were obtained by the U.S. Office of 
Personnel Management and made available to CRCL for analysis purposes. 

Conclusion 

DHS is proud of its accomplishments in the areas of attracting, developing, and retaining an increasingly diverse 
workforce.  This report identified several challenges: establishing an effective career development program; 
establishing a retention strategy; correcting substantial low participation rates of White women in the DHS 
workforce; and increasing the participation of Individuals with Disabilities and Individuals with Targeted 
Disabilities.  The plan in Part I addresses these issues. 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

25 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
EEOC FORM  
715-01   
PART F  

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission   
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL   
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT  

CERTIFICATION of ESTABLISHMENT of CONTINUING 
EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY PROGRAMS 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

26 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART G 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

 Self-Assessment towards a Model EEO Program Checklist 

Essential Element A: Demonstrated Commitment from Agency Leadership 

Requires the agency head to issue written policy statements ensuring a workplace free of discriminatory 
harassment and a commitment to equal employment opportunity. 

PART G, Essential Element A, Section 1 - Issuance of EEO Policy Statement 

Measures  

Measure Met?  

Comments  

A.1.a. Was EEO policy statement issued within  6 - 9 months  of  
installation  of Agency Head? (  Please list date of  agency head  
installation and date of issuance in the comments column).  

A.1.b. During current  Agency  Head's tenure, has EEO policy statement  
been re-issued annually?  

A.1.c. Are new employees provided a copy of the EEO policy  
statement during orientation?  

A.1.d. When an employee is promoted into the supervisory ranks, is 
s/he provided a copy of the EEO policy  statement?  

YES 

YES

YES

YES

The Secretary  was installed  
12/16/2013. The EEO policy  
statement was issued  6/12/2014. 

PART G, Essential Element A, Section 2 - Communication of EEO Policy Statements 

Measures  

Measure Met?  

Comments  

A.2.a. Have the Heads of subordinate reporting components 
communicated support of all agency EEO policies through the ranks?  

NO 

FEMA has not met this  
measure.  

A.2.b. Has the agency  made  written  materials available to all  
employees and applicants, informing them of the variety of EEO 
programs and administrative and judicial remedial procedures available 
to them?  

A.2.c. Has the agency prominently posted such  written  materials in all 
personnel and EEO offices, and on the agency's internal website? [29  
CFR 1614.102(b)(5)] 

YES

YES 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

27

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART G 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

PART G, Essential Element A, Section 3 - Evaluation of Managers and Supervisors on Their 
Commitment to EEO Principles 

Measures 

Measure Met? 

Comments 

A.3.a. Are managers and supervisors evaluated on their commitment to 
agency EEO policies and principles? 

A.3.b. Are managers and supervisors evaluated on their commitment to 
resolve problems/disagreements and other conflicts in their respective 
work environments as they arise? 

A.3.c. Are managers and supervisors evaluated on their commitment to 
address concerns, whether perceived or real, raised by employees and 
following up with appropriate action to correct or eliminate tension in 
the workplace? 

A.3.d. Are managers and supervisors evaluated on their commitment to 
support the agency's EEO program through allocation of mission 
personnel to participate in community out-reach and recruitment 
programs with private employers, public schools and universities? 

A.3.e. Are managers and supervisors evaluated on their commitment to 
ensure full cooperation of employees under his/her supervision with 
EEO office officials such as EEO counselors, EEO investigators, etc.? 

A.3.f. Are managers and supervisors evaluated on their commitment to 
ensure a workplace that is free from all forms of discrimination, 
harassment and retaliation? 

A.3.g. Are managers and supervisors evaluated on their commitment to 
ensure that subordinate supervisors have effective managerial 
communication and interpersonal skills in order to supervise most 
effectively in a workplace with diverse employees and avoid disputes 
arising 
from ineffective communications? 

A.3.h. Are managers and supervisors evaluated on their commitment to 
ensure the provision of requested religious accommodations when such 
accommodations do not cause an undue hardship? 

A.3.i. Are managers and supervisors evaluated on their commitment to 
ensure the provision of requested disability accommodations to 
qualified individuals with disabilities when such accommodations do 
not cause an undue hardship? 

A.3.j. Have all employees been informed about what behaviors are 
inappropriate in the workplace and that this behavior may result in  
disciplinary actions? If  yes, describe what means were  
utilized by the agency  to inform its  workforce  
about penalties for unacceptable behavior in the comments column.  

YES 

YES 

YES 

YES 

YES 

YES 

YES 

YES 

YES 

YES 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

28 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART G 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

Measures 

Measure Met? 

Comments 

A.3.k. Have the procedures for reasonable accommodation for 
individuals with disabilities been made readily available/accessible to 
all employees by disseminating such procedures during orientation of 
new employees and by making such procedure available on the World 
Wide Web or Internet? 

YES 

A.3.l. Have managers and supervisors been trained on their 
responsibilities under the procedures for reasonable accommodation? 

YES

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

29 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART G 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

Essential Element B: Integration of EEO into the Agency's Strategic Mission 

Element B requires that the agency's EEO programs be organized and structured to maintain a workplace that is 
free from discrimination in any of the agency's policies, procedures or practices and supports the agency's 
strategic mission. 

PART G, Essential Element B, Section 1 - Reporting Structure for EEO Program 

Measures 

Measure Met? 

Comments 

B.1.a. Is the EEO Director under the direct supervision of the Agency 
Head? [See 29 CFR 1614.102(b)(4)] For subordinate level reporting 
components, is the EEO Director/Officer under the immediate 
supervision of the lower level component's head official? (For example, 
does the Regional EEO Officer report to the Regional Administrator?)  

Are the duties and responsibilities of the EEO officials clearly 

B.1.b. 
defined?  

B.1.c. Do the EEO officials have the knowledge, skills, and abilities to 
carry out the duties and responsibilities of their positions?  

B.1.d. If the agency has 2nd level reporting components, are there 
organizational charts that clearly define the reporting structure for EEO 
programs?  

B.1.e. If the agency has 2nd level reporting components, does the 
agency-wide EEO Director have authority for EEO programs within the 
subordinate reporting components?   

B.1.f. If no, please describe how EEO program authority is delegated to 
subordinate reporting components, in Part H.  

NO  

YES

YES

NO  

NO  

NO  

EEO Directors at CBP. CIS, and 
FLETC do not report to their 
respective agency heads.  

CBP and FEMA have not met 
this measure.  

CBP and FEMA have not met 
this measure.  

CBP and FEMA have not met 
this measure.  

PART G, Essential Element B, Section 2 - EEO Communication with Senior Leaders 

Measures 

Measure Met? 

Comments 

B.2.a. Does the EEO Director/Officer have a regular, effective means 
of informing the Agency Head and other top management of the 
effectiveness, efficiency, and legal compliance of the agency's EEO 
program? 

B.2.b. After submission of the previous Form 715, did the EEO 
Director/Officer present a State of the Agency; briefing to the Agency 
Head and other senior officials, including a performance assessment in 
each of the 6 elements of the Model EEO program, and report agency 
progress in completing its barrier analysis - including barriers 
identified, eliminated, or impact reduced? 

YES 

YES 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

30 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART G 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

Measures 

Measure Met? 

Comments 

B.2.c. Are EEO officials present during agency pre-decisional 
deliberations regarding recruitment strategies, vacancy projections, 
succession planning, selections for training/career development 
opportunities, and other workforce changes?  

Does the agency consider whether any group of employees or 

B.2.d. 
applicants might be negatively impacted prior to making human 
resource decisions such as re-organizations and re-alignments?  

B.2.e. Are management/personnel policies, procedures and practices 
examined at regular intervals to assess whether there are any hidden 
impediments to the realization of equality of opportunity for any 
group(s) of employees or applicants? [See 29 C.F.R. 1614.102(b)(3)]  

B.2.f. Is the EEO Director included in the agency's strategic planning, 
especially the agency's human capital plan, regarding succession 
planning, training, etc., to ensure that EEO concerns are integrated into 
the agency's strategic mission?  

NO 

NO  

USCIS did not meet this 
measure.  

USCIS did not meet this 
measure.  

NO  

ICE did not meet this measure.  

NO 

USCIS did not meet this 
measure.  

PART G, Essential Element B, Section 3 - Sufficient EEO Program Staffing 

Measures 

Measure Met? 

Comments 

B.3.a. Does the EEO Director have the authority and funding to ensure 
implementation of agency EEO action plans to improve EEO program  
efficiency and/or eliminate identified barriers to the realization of  
equality of opportunity?  

B.3.b. Are sufficient personnel resources allocated to the EEO Program  
to ensure that agency self-assessments and self-analyses prescribed by  
EEO MD-715 are conducted annually and to maintain an effective 
complaint processing system?  

B.3.c. Are statutory/regulatory EEO related Special Emphasis  
Programs sufficiently  staffed?  

B.3.d. Is the Federal Women's Program sufficiently staffed - 5 U.S.C. 
7201; 38 U.S.C. 4214; Title 5 CFR, Subpart B, 720.204? 

B.3.e. Is the Hispanic Employment Program sufficiently staffed - Title 
5 CFR, Subpart B, 720.204? 

B.3.f. Is the People With Disabilities Program Manager; Selective 
Placement Program for Individuals With Disabilities sufficiently 
staffed - Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act; Title 5 U.S.C. Subpart 
B, Chapter 31, Subchapter I-3102: 5 CFR 213.3102(u); 5 CFR 
315.709? 

YES 

YES 

NO  

YES 

YES 

YES 

USCIS did not meet this 
measure. 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

31 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART G 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

Measures 

Measure Met?  

Comments 

B.3.g. Are other agency Special Emphasis Programs monitored by the 
EEO Office for coordination and compliance with EEO guidelines and 
principles, such as: FEORP - 5 CFR 720; Veterans Employment 
Programs; Black or African American; American Indian or Alaska 
Native; Asian; and Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander Programs? 

YES 

PART G, Essential Element B, Section 4 - Sufficient EEO Program Funding 

Measures 

Measure Met? 

Comments 

B.4.a. Are there sufficient resources to enable the agency to conduct a 
thorough barrier analysis of its workforce, including the provision of  
adequate data collection and tracking systems?  

B.4.b. Is there sufficient budget allocated to all employees to utilize, 
when desired, all EEO programs, including the complaint processing  
program and ADR, and to make a request for reasonable 
accommodation? (Including  subordinate level reporting components?)  

B.4.c. Has funding been  secured for publication and distribution of  
EEO materials (e.g. harassment  policies, EEO posters, reasonable 
accommodations procedures, etc.)?  

B.4.d. Is there a central funding or other mechanism for funding 
supplies, equipment and services necessary to provide disability 
accommodations? 

B.4.e. Does the agency fund major renovation projects to ensure timely 
compliance with Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards? 

B.4.f. Is the EEO Program allocated sufficient resources to train all 
employees on EEO Programs, including administrative and judicial 
remedial procedures available to employees? 

B.4.g. Is there sufficient funding to ensure the prominent posting of  
written  materials in all personnel and EEO offices? [See 29 CFR 
1614.102(b)(5)] 

B.4.h. Is there sufficient funding to ensure that all employees have 
access to this training and information? 

B.4.i. Is there sufficient funding to provide all managers/supervisors 
with training and periodic up-dates on their EEO responsibilities for 
ensuring a workplace that is free from all forms of discrimination, 
including harassment and retaliation? 

B.4.j. Is there sufficient funding to provide all managers/supervisors 
with training and periodic up-dates on their EEO responsibilities to 
provide religious accommodations? 

NO  

CBP did not meet this measure.  

ICE did not meet this measure. 

U.S. Coast Guard did not meet 
this measure. 

YES 

YES 

NO 

NO 

YES 

YES 

YES 

YES 

YES 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

32 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART G 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

Measures 

Measure Met?  

Comments 

B.4.k. Is there sufficient funding to provide all managers/supervisors 
with training and periodic up-dates on their EEO responsibilities to 
provide disability accommodations in accordance with the agency's 
written procedures? 

B.4.l. Is there sufficient funding to provide all managers/supervisors 
with training and periodic up-dates on their EEO responsibilities in the 
EEO discrimination complaint process? 

B.4.m. Is there sufficient funding to provide all managers/supervisors 
with training and periodic up-dates on their EEO responsibilities to 
participate in ADR? 

YES

YES 

YES 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

33 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART G 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

Essential Element C: Management and Program Accountability 

Element C requires the Agency Head to hold all managers, supervisors, and EEO Officials responsible for the 
effective implementation of the agency's EEO Program and Plan. 

PART G, Essential Element C, Section 1 - EEO Communication with Managers and Supervisors 

Measures 

Measure Met? 

Comments 

C.1.a. Are regular (monthly/quarterly/semi-annually) EEO updates 
provided to management/supervisory officials by EEO program 
officials? 

C.1.b. Do EEO program officials coordinate the development and 
implementation of EEO Plans with all appropriate agency managers to 
include Agency Counsel, Human Resource Officials, Finance, and the 
Chief Information Officer? 

NO  

YES

USCIS did not meet this 
measure. 

PART G, Essential Element C, Section 2 - EEO & Human Resources Collaboration & Coordination 

Measures 

Measure Met? 

Comments 

C.2.a. Have time-tables or schedules been established for the agency to 
review its Merit Promotion Program Policy and Procedures for 
systemic barriers that may be impeding full participation in promotion  
opportunities by all groups?  

C.2.b. Have time-tables or schedules been established for the agency to
review its Employee Recognition  Awards Program and Procedures for 
systemic barriers that may be impeding full participation in promotion  
opportunities by all groups?  

C.2.c. Have time-tables or schedules been established for the agency to 
review its Employee Development/Training Programs for systemic 
barriers that may be impeding full participation in training 
opportunities by all groups? 

NO 

ICE has not met this  measure.  

NO

CBP and ICE have not met this  
measure.  

NO 

ICE has  not  met this  measure.  

PART G, Essential Element C, Section 3 - Disciplinary Action Taken 

Measures 

Measures Met? 

Comments 

C.3.a. Does the agency have a disciplinary policy and/or a table of 
penalties that covers employees found to have committed 
discrimination? 

C.3.b. Have all employees, supervisors, and managers been informed as 
to the penalties for being found to perpetrate discriminatory behavior or 
for taking personnel actions based upon a prohibited basis? 

YES 

YES 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

34 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART G 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

Measures 

Measures Met? 

Comments 

C.3.c. Has the agency, when appropriate, disciplined or sanctioned  
managers/supervisors or employees found to have discriminated over 
the past two years? If  yes, in the Comments column, cite the number 
found to have discriminated and list penalty/disciplinary action  for each 
type violation.  

If yes, cite the number found to have discriminated and list 
penalty/disciplinary action for each type violation. 

C.3.d. Does the agency promptly (within the established time frame) 

comply  with EEOC, Merit Systems Protection Board, Federal Labor 
Relations Authority, labor arbitrators, and District Court orders?
  

C.3.e. Does the agency review disability accommodation  
decisions/actions to ensure compliance with its written procedures and 
analyze the information  tracked for trends, problem, etc.?  

YES 

YES 


YES 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

35 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART G 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

Essential Element D, Proactive Prevention of Unlawful Discrimination 

Element D requires that the Agency Head makes early efforts to prevent discriminatory actions and eliminate 
barriers to Equal Employment Opportunity in the workplace. 

PART G, Essential Element D, Section 1 - Barrier Analysis Process 

Measures 

Measure Met? 

Comments 

D.1.a. Do senior managers meet with and assist the EEO Director 
and/or other EEO Program Officials in the identification of  barriers that 
may be impeding the realization of equal employment opportunity?  

D.1.b. When barriers are identified, do senior managers develop and 
implement, with the assistance of  the agency EEO office, agency EEO 
Action Plans to eliminate said  barriers?  

D.1.c. Do senior managers successfully implement EEO Action Plans 
and incorporate the EEO Action Plan Objectives into agency strategic 
plans?  

D.1.d. Are trend analyses of  workforce profiles conducted by race, 
national origin, sex, and disability?  

D.1.e. Are trend analyses of the workforce's major occupations  
conducted by race, national origin, sex, and disability?  

D.1.f. Are trend analyses of the workforce's grade level distribution  
conducted by race, national origin, sex, and disability?  

D.1.g. Are trend analyses of the workforce's compensation and reward 
system conducted by race, national origin, sex, and disability?  

D.1.h. Are trend analyses of the effects of  management/personnel 
policies, procedures and practices conducted by race, national origin, 
sex, and disability?  

YES 

YES 

YES 

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES 

PART G, Essential Element D, Section 2 - Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) is Encouraged 

Measures 

Measures Met? 

Comments 

D.2.a. Are all employees encouraged to use ADR? 

D.2.b. Is the participation of supervisors and managers in the ADR 
process required? 

YES 

NO 

FLETC, ICE, and TSA have not 
met this measure. 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

36 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART G 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

Essential Element E, Efficiency 

Element E requires that the Agency Head ensure that there are effective systems in place for evaluating the impact 
and effectiveness of the agency's EEO programs as well as an efficient and fair dispute resolution process. 

PART G, Essential Element E, Section 1 - Sufficient Resources to Evaluation EEO Program 

Measures 

Measure Met? 

Comments 

E.1.a. Does the EEO office employ personnel with adequate training 
and experience to conduct the analyses required by MD-715 and these 
instructions? 

E.1.b. Has the agency implemented an adequate data collection and 
analysis systems that permit tracking of the information required by 
MD-715 and these instructions? 

E.1.c. Have sufficient resources been provided to conduct effective 
audits of field facilities' efforts to achieve a model EEO program and 
eliminate discrimination under Title VII and the Rehabilitation Act? 

E.1.d. Is there a designated agency official or other mechanism in place 
to coordinate or assist with processing requests for disability 
accommodations in all major components of the agency? 

E.1.e. Are 90% of accommodation requests processed  within the time 
 
frame set forth in the agency's procedures for reasonable 
accommodation?
  

CBP, ICE, and TSA have not 
met this measure. 

USCIS has not met this 
measure. 

USCIS has not met this 
measure. 

NO 

NO 

NO 

YES 

NO  

TSA has not met this measure.
 

PART G, Essential Element E, Section 2 - Effective Complaint Tracking and Monitoring System 

Measures 

Measure Met? 

Comments 

E.2.a. Does the agency  use a complaint  tracking and monitoring system  
that allows identification of the location and status of  complaints and 
length of time elapsed at each stage of the agency's complaint 
resolution process?  

E.2.b. Does the agency's tracking  system identify the issues and bases 
of the complaints, the aggrieved individuals/complainants, the involved  
management officials and other information to analyze complaint 
activity and trends?   

E.2.c. Does the agency  hold contractors accountable for delay in  
counseling and investigation processing times? If  yes, in the comments 
column, briefly describe how.  

E.2.d. Does the agency  monitor and ensure that new investigators, 
counselors, including contract and  collateral duty investigators, receive 
the 32 hours of training required in accordance with EEO Management  
Directive MD-110? 

YES

YES

YES

YES

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

37 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART G 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

Measures 

Measure Met?  

Comments 

E.2.e. Does the agency  monitor and ensure that experienced counselors, 
investigators, including contract and collateral duty investigators,  
receive the 8 hours of refresher training required on an annual basis in  
accordance with  EEO  Management  Directive  MD-110? 

YES

PART G, Essential Element E, Section 3 - Timeliness in EEO Complaint Process 

Measures 

Measure Met?  

Comments 

FEMA and ICE have not met 
this measure.

FEMA and ICE have not met 
this measure.  

E.3.a. Are benchmarks in place that compare the agency's 
discrimination complaint processes with 29 CFR Part 1614?  

E.3.b. Does the agency provide timely EEO counseling  within 30 days 
of the initial request or  within  an agreed upon extension in  writing, up  
to 60 days?  

E.3.c. Does the agency provide an aggrieved person  with  written  
notification of  his/her rights and responsibilities in the EEO process in  
a timely fashion?  

E.3.d. Does the agency  complete the investigations within the 
applicable prescribed time frame?  

E.3.e. When a complainant requests a final agency decision, does the 
agency issue the decision  within 60 days of the request?  

E.3.f.  When a complainant requests a hearing, does the agency  
immediately  upon receipt of the request from the EEOC AJ forward the 
investigative file to the EEOC Hearing Office?  

E.3.g. When a settlement agreement is entered into, does the agency  
timely  complete any obligations provided for in such agreements?  

E.3.h. Does the agency ensure timely compliance with EEOC AJ  
decisions which are not the subject of an appeal by the agency?  

YES

NO  

YES 

NO  

NO

YES 

YES

YES

PART G, Essential Element E, Section 4 - Efficient and Fair ADR Process 

Measures 

Measure Met?  

Comments 

E.4.a. In accordance with 29 CFR 1614.102(b), has the agency  
established an ADR Program  during the pre-complaint and formal 
complaint  stages of the EEO process?  

YES 

E.4.b. Does the agency require all managers and supervisors to receive 

ADR training in accordance with EEOC (29 CFR Part 1614) 
 
regulations, with emphasis on  the federal government's interest in  
encouraging  mutual resolution of disputes and the benefits associated 

with utilizing ADR?
   

NO  

ICE has not met this measure.
 

E.4.c. After the agency  has offered ADR and the complainant has 
elected to participate in ADR, are the managers required to participate?  

NO 

FLETC and ICE have  not met 
this measure.  

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

38 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART G 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

Measures 

Measure Met?  

Comments 

E.5.c. Does the responsible management official directly involved in  
the dispute have settlement authority?  

NO  

USCIS has not met this  
measure.  

PART G, Essential Element E, Section 5 - Effectiveness of EEO Data Collection Systems 

Measures 

Measure Met? 

Comments 

E.5.a. Does the agency have a system of management controls in place 
to ensure the timely, accurate, complete and consistent reporting of 
EEO complaint data to the EEOC? 

E.5.b. Does the agency provide reasonable resources for the EEO 
complaint process to ensure efficient and successful operation in 
accordance with 29 CFR 1614.102(a)(1)? 

E.5.c. Does the agency EEO office have management controls in place 
to monitor and ensure that the data received from Human Resources is 
accurate, timely received, and contains all of the required data elements 
for submitting annual reports to the EEOC? 

E.5.d. Do the agency's EEO programs address all of the laws enforced 
by the EEOC? 

E.5.e. Does the agency identify and monitor significant trends in 
complaint processing to determine whether the agency is meeting its 
obligations under Title VII and the Rehabilitation Act? 

E.5.f. Does the agency track recruitment efforts and analyze efforts to 
identify potential barriers in accordance with MD-715 standards? 

E.5.g. Does the agency consult with other agencies of similar size on 
the effectiveness of their EEO programs to identify best practices and 
share ideas? 

NO 

ICE has not met this measure. 

YES 

NO 

YES 

YES 

NO 

YES 

FEMA has not met this 
measure. 

FEMA has not met this 
measure. 

PART G, Essential Element E, Section 6 - Elimination of Conflict of Interest with Legal Defense 
Function 

Measures 

Measure Met? 

Comments 

E.6.a. Are legal sufficiency reviews of EEO matters handled by a 
functional unit that is separate and apart from  the unit which handles 
agency representation in EEO complaints?  

E.6.b. Does the agency discrimination complaint process ensure a 
neutral adjudication  function?  

E.6.c. If applicable, are processing time frames incorporated  for the 
legal counsel's sufficiency review  for timely processing of complaints?  

YES 

YES 

YES 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

39 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART G 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

Essential Element F, Responsiveness and Legal Compliance 

Element F requires that federal Agencies are in full compliance with EEO statutes and EEOC regulations, policy 
guidance, and other written instructions. 

PART G, Essential Element F, Section 1 - Timely Compliance with Administrative Judge Orders 

Measure 

Measure Met? 

Comments 

F.1.a. Does the agency  have a system of  management control to ensure 
that the agency officials timely  comply  with any orders or directives 
issued by EEOC Administrative Judges?  

YES 

PART G, Essential Element F, Section 2 - Timely Completion of Ordered Corrective Action 

Measures 

Measure Met? 

Comments 

F.2.a. Does the agency have control over the payroll processing 
function of the agency? If yes, answer the two questions below. 

F.2.b. Are there steps in place to guarantee responsive, timely, and 
predictable processing of ordered monetary relief? 

F.2.c. Are procedures in place to promptly  process other forms of  
ordered relief?  

YES 

YES 

YES

PART G, Essential Element F, Section 3 - Staff Accountability for Legal Compliance 

Measures 

Measure Met? 

Comments 

F.3.a. Is compliance with EEOC orders encompassed in the  
performance standards of any  agency  employees? If  yes, please identify  
the employees by title in the comments column, and state how  
performance is  measured.  

F.3.b. Is the unit charged with the responsibility for compliance with  
EEOC orders located in the EEO office? If no, please identify the unit 
in  which it is located in the comments column.  

F.3.c. Have the involved employees received any  formal training in  
EEO compliance?  

F.3.d. Does the agency promptly provide the EEOC Attorney Fee 
documentation  for completing compliance, such as a copy of the check  
issued for attorney  fees and/or a narrative statement by an appropriate 
agency official, or agency payment order dating the dollar amount of  
attorney fees paid?  

F.3.e. Does the agency promptly provide the EEOC awards 
documentation  for completing compliance, such as a narrative  
statement by an appropriate agency  official stating the dollar amount 
and the criteria used to calculate the award?  

YES

YES 

YES

YES 

YES

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

40 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART G 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

Measures 

Measure Met? 

Comments 

F.3.f. Does the agency promptly provide the EEOC documentation of  
back pay and interest for completing compliance, such as computer 
print-outs or payroll documents outlining  gross back pay and interest, 
copy of any checks issued, or narrative statement by an appropriate 
agency official of total monies paid?  

F.3.g. Does the agency promptly provide the EEOC documentation  
regarding compensatory damages for completing compliance, such as  
the final agency decision and evidence of payment, if  made?  

F.3.h. Does the agency promptly provide the EEOC training 
documentation  for completing compliance, such as the attendance 
roster at training session(s), or a narrative statement by an appropriate 
agency official confirming that specific persons or groups of persons 
attended training on a certain  date?  

F.3.i. Does the agency promptly provide the EEOC personnel action  
documentation  for completing compliance (e.g., reinstatement, 
promotion,  hiring, reassignment), such as copies of SF-50s? 

F.3.j. Does the agency promptly provide the EEOC documentation of  
the posting of Notice of Violation for completing compliance, such as  
the original, signed and dated  notice, reflecting the dates of posting? (A  
copy will suffice if  original is not available.)  

F.3.k. Does the agency promptly provide the EEOC documentation of  
supplemental investigation, such as: (1) a copy of the letter to  
complainant acknowledging receipt from EEOC of remanded case; (2) 
a copy of the letter to complainant transmitting the Report of  
Investigation (not the ROI itself, unless specified); and (3) a copy of the 
request for a hearing (complainant's request or agency's transmittal 
letter)?  

F.3.l. Does the agency promptly provide the EEOC the Final Agency  
Decision (FAD), such as the FAD or a copy of the complainant's  
request for a hearing?  

F.3.m. Does the agency promptly provide the EEOC documentation of  
restoration of leave, such as a print-out or statement identifying the 
amount of leave restored, if applicable?  If no, provide an explanation or 
statement in the comments column.  

F.3.n. Does the agency promptly provide the EEOC documentation of  
civil actions, such as a complete copy of the civil action complaint 
demonstrating same issues raised as in compliance matter?  

F.3.o. Does the agency promptly provide the EEOC settlement  
agreements, such as the signed and dated agreement with specific dollar 
amounts, and appropriate documentation of relief provided?  

YES 

YES 

YES 

YES 

YES

YES 

YES 

YES

YES 

YES 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

41 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART H 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

EEO Plans for Attaining the Essential Elements of a Model EEO Program 

Part H.1– Embrace Best Practices in Equal Employment Opportunity Leadership 

Statement of  Model Program Essential 
Element Deficiency  

Element A – Demonstrated Commitment from 
Agency Leadership 

Brief Description of Program Deficiency 

Specific deficiencies identified by Components: 
1-Was the Equal Employment Opportunity Policy statement  
issued within  6-9  months of  Agency Head installation?  
3-Is an Equal Employment Opportunity Policy re-issued  
annually?  
5-When employee is promoted into supervisor, is he/she  
provided a copy of the Equal Employment Opportunity  
Policy statement?  
6-Have the heads of subordinate reporting Components  
communicated support of all agency EEO policies through  
the ranks?  
9c-Are managers and superiors evaluated on their  
commitment to agency EEO policies and principles,  
including efforts to: support the agency’s EEO program  
through allocation of  mission  personnel to participate in  
community out-reach and recruitment programs  with  
private employers, public schools, and universities?  
9g- Are managers and superiors evaluated on their  
commitment to ensure the provision of requested religious  
accommodations when such accommodations do not cause an  
undue hardship? 

Program Deficiency Analysis: 

Lack of consistent communication regarding the Equal Employment 
Opportunity policies and program procedures for processing and 
requesting religious accommodations. 

Objective: 

Clarify and revise communications and actions from the senior 
leadership to ensure that knowledge of their commitment to Equal 
Employment Opportunity is spread throughout the Department. 

Responsible Officials: 

OCHCO; CRCL;DHS Components 

Date Objective Initiated: 

March 30, 2008 

Target Date for Completion of Objective 

September 30, 2015 - revised to correspond with Part I Multi-Year 
Plan 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

42 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART H 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

Planned Activities Toward Completion of Objective 

Planned Activities 

Target  
Date 

Completed?

Completion 
Date 

1) OCHCO and CRCL will work jointly with DHS Components to 
develop a communication, marketing, and education strategy for senior 
leadership that consistently articulates the link between equal 
employment opportunity and DHS’s mission. 

2) Components will develop and provide executives and managers with 
necessary training, tools, and resources to leverage diversity. 

09/30/2011 
Revised to 
09/30/2012 

Annually, 
starting: 
09/30/2012 

 Yes 

09/21/2012 

 Yes 

09/30/2012 

3) DHS EEO offices will provide updates to EEO policies and will 
communicate these updates to managers, supervisors, and employees.  
This communication includes distribution to new employees during 
orientation. 

4) Human Capital Officials will establish protocol to provide EEO 
offices with names of employees promoted to supervisory positions in 
support of the requirement to communicate current EEO policies to 
newly appointed supervisors within 45 days of appointment. 

09/30/2015 

No 

12/30/2015 

No 

5) Ensure that DHS Leadership communicates EEO policies throughout 
DHS Components that will be cascaded throughout the organization. 

09/30/2015 

No 

6) Make the procedures for requesting reasonable accommodation and 
religious accommodations available/accessible to all employees by 
disseminating during orientation and during staff meetings. 

09/30/2015 

No 

Report of Accomplishments and Modifications to Objective 

Activities #1 and 3: 
Through the creation of the DHS Diversity and Inclusion Strategic Plan in FY12, the Department has planned 
objectives and goals towards promoting the principles of EEO, diversity, and inclusion throughout the 
Components. 

Activity #2: 
x 

The Diversity and Inclusion Sustainability Subcommittee developed a diversity training similar in content to 
the training conducted by Laura Liswood,  Senior Advisor for Goldman Sachs, and author of The Loudest 
Duck: Moving beyond Diversity while Embracing Differences to Achieve Success at Work,  in FY14 and 
incorporated material from OPM’s New IQ training program.  This training will be presented to the remaining 
career senior executives in the National capital Region who did not attend Liswood’s training (20%).  The 
training is expected to be conducted in FY 2015, at which time all career senior executives in the National 
Capital Region would have received diversity and inclusion training.  DHS is currently assessing options to 
train the executives in the field. 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

43 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART H 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

x	 

In FY14, DHS analyzed DHS-wide Leadership Development Programs.  Of the 52 individuals that 
participated in the DHS-wide Leadership Development Programs, 47 were in the SES CDP and 5 in the HQ 
Federal Executive Institute. Due to program restructuring, a DHS Fellows Program did not convene in FY14; 
however a new Fellows Program is scheduled to commence in FY15.  Women participation rates increased 
from the Leadership Development Program (34.1%) to HQ Federal Executive Institute (36.2%), 
Hispanic/Latino participation rates  significantly increased from the Leadership Development Program (2.3%) 
to the Fellows Program (8.5%), and participation rates for Blacks/African Americans also increased (from 
13.7% to 17.0%).  This cohort included 19.1% Veterans and 4.3% Veterans with Disabilities. 
x	  The DHS Diversity Management Section provided training and informational sessions on the Equal 

Employment Opportunity Management Directive 715, the Executive Agency Action Report to Assist 
Minority Serving Institutions, Providing Reasonable Accommodations, and Working with Tribal Colleges 
and Universities, and Effective Consultation with Tribal Members. 

x	  As part of CRCL’s Diversity Management Section Forum Series “Ask the Expert,” a Senior EEOC Attorney 
provided a program for Human Capital, Equal Employment Opportunity Specialists, Managers, and Policy 
Advisors, Disability Program Managers, Reasonable Accommodation Program Managers, Selective 
Placement Program Managers, and Complaints Manager and Attorneys, on the topic of providing reasonable 
accommodations.  

x	  U.S. Office of Personnel Management’s National Disability Employment Program Manager discussed DHS 

progress in hiring Individuals with Disabilities, as required in Executive Order 13548.   

x	  Former Acting Director, Division of Outreach and Retention Office of Diversity and Inclusion at the U.S. 
Department of Veterans Affairs discussed best practices in implementing the U.S. Department of Veterans 
Affair’s Disability Program, which the U.S. Government Accounting Office listed as among the best in 
federal government.  

x	  The Reasonable Accommodations Program Manager, Environmental Protection Agency, discussed best 

practices in implementing Environmental Protection Agency’s Reasonable Accommodations Program, which 
also included a proactive workplace ergonomic program. 

x	  CRCL’s Attorney-Advisor coordinated with Components and provided guidance to senior leadership on 

recruitment, hiring, and reasonable accommodations, Individuals with Disabilities/Individuals with Targeted 
Disabilities representation, accessibility, internships, training, policy, Schedule A, Workforce Recruitment 
program, and the Operation Warfighter Program. 

x   DHS  Components reported the following  diversity  and inclusion training provided to senior executives, 

managers, and supervisors throughout their organizations, including field facilities:  

x   Annual Notification and Federal Employee Antidiscrimination and Retaliation Act of 2002 Report to  

Congress /Whistleblower Protection Act  

x   Americans With Disabilities Act  
x   Providing Reasonable Accommodations 
x   Diversity Awareness 
x   Workplace Violence Awareness Training  
x   Managing a Diverse Workforce, Including Generational Differences  
x  
x   Deaf Awareness 
x  Disability Etiquette 

Inclusive Workplace for Gay and Lesbian, Gay, Bi-sexual and Transgender Employees  

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

44 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART H 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

x   Equal Employment Opportunity  Training Development
  
x   Executive Coaching Programs
  
x  
x   Leadership Development Programs
  
x  Human Capital Responsibilities and Diversity Management
 

Instructor/Facilitator Qualifications Workshop
  

x	  FEMA provided Emergency Management Training to 4 Tribal Colleges and Universities and 8 Historically 

Black Colleges and Universities and 16 Hispanic Serving Institutions. 

x	  FEMA updated their Tribal Plan Review Guide and Handbook and developed The Tribal Mitigation 

Improvement Process FAQ, and posted on the FEMA website. Over 100 tribes received an article regarding 
the process via newsletter and email. FLETC senior level managers participated in a Women’s History Month 
Panel Discussion, where the event was video teleconferenced to FLETC’s field sites.  In addition to the panel 
discussion and in commemoration of Women’s History Month, four FLETC females participated in the panel, 
entitled:  “The Best and Brightest at DHS Leading the Way in STEM Fields” on DHSCovery.  Five FLETC 
females’ profiles were highlighted on the FLETCnet.  FLETC senior level managers also participated in a 
Black History Month Lunch and Learn event and a Video Series.  Approximately 140 FLETC staff members, 
Partner Organization staff members and students attended the programs 

x	  TSA provided onsite Equal Employment Opportunity/Civil Rights training at 34 locations nationwide to 
nearly 3,901 managers, supervisors and front-line employees on their rights and responsibilities in 
maintaining and working in an environment that is free of discrimination, harassment, and retaliation.  The 
trainings ensured compliance of the mandated training resulting from findings of discrimination and 
negotiated agency settlement agreements. 

x	  USCG demonstrated assistive technology devices as part of their National Disability Employment and 

Awareness Month program. 

x	  USCIS facilitated a wide variety of training opportunities for employees to sustain a diverse and high-

performing workforce, including anti-harassment and posttraumatic stress disorder webinars along with other 
training presentations like Fostering a Diverse and Respectful Workforce, Sensitivity, Generational 
Differences, Creating an Inclusive Workplace for Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender Employees and 
Deaf Awareness which resulted in 869 employee participants. 

x	  CBP required all new managers and supervisors to complete EEO training, which includes modules on: 

diversity and inclusion; the EEO complaint process, preventing and addressing discriminatory harassment; 
and alternative dispute resolution (mediation).   
ICE continued to promote the “Human Exploitation Rescue Operative (HERO) Child Rescue Corps” program 
for wounded, ill or injured special operations forces.  This innovative program focuses on recruiting disabled 
veterans to serve as computer forensic interns.  Selective participants are trained, equipped, and embedded 
into computer forensic intern positions within Homeland Security Investigation Field Offices around the 
country.  This program has allowed ICE the ability to promote diversity in hiring by creating a unique way to 
identify, train, and potentially hire individuals with targeted disabilities, and contribute toward eliminating 
attitudinal barriers towards hiring individuals with disabilities. 
ICE provided EEO and Diversity training updates to 83 percent of its managers and supervisors. 
ICE established its first Executive Diversity Council, and published its first Diversity Best Practices list of its 
Directorates and Program Offices. 

x	 

x	 
x	 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

45 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART H 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

x 

USSS’s Human Resources & Training/Recruiting Division (REC) Disability Recruitment Working Group 
designed a training video for hiring managers.  This video is entitled, “Disability Hiring Awareness and You:  
Your Roadmap to Effectively Hiring Individuals with Disabilities.” This 4-hour training session covers:  
Executive Order 13548; benefits of hiring individuals with disabilities; creating internships within the Secret 
Service for this target group; special hiring authorities; interview etiquette; reasonable accommodations;  and 
agency points of contact. 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

46 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART H 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

Part H.2– Ensure Management and Program Accountability 

Statement of  Model Program Essential 
Element Deficiency  

Element C – Management and Program 
Accountability 

Program Deficiency Analysis: 

Objective: 

Brief Description of Program Deficiency  

Specific Deficiencies Identified by Components: 

36-Are regular (monthly, quarterly, semi-annually) Equal 
Employment Opportunity program updates provided to 
management/supervisory officials by Equal Employment 
Opportunity program officials? 

38 – 40  Have time tables or schedules been established for the 
agency to review its Merit Promotion Policy and Procedures, 
Employee Recognition Awards Program and Procedures, Employee 
Development/Training Programs for systematic barriers that may be 
impeding full participation in the program for all groups? 

43-Has the agency, when appropriate, disciplined or sanctioned 
managers/supervisors, or employees found to have discriminated 
over the past two years? 

45-Does the agency review disability accommodation 
decisions/actions to ensure compliance with its written procedures 
and analyze the information tracked for trends, problems, etc.? 

Many standard human resources policies were outdated or had never 
been issued; there was no cost-benefit analysis of recruitment efforts; 
there was no systematic implementation of reasonable 
accommodations; and human resources and Equal Employment 
Opportunity offices were often not coordinating closely.  

Create accountability for all managers, supervisors, and Equal 
Employment Opportunity officials and personnel officers for the 
effective implementation and management of the DHS Equal 
Employment Opportunity program. 

Responsible Officials: 

OCHCO; CRCL;DHS Components 

Date Objective Initiated: 

March 30, 2008 

Target Date for Completion of Objective 

September 30, 2011 
Revised to September 30, 2015 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

47 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART H 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

Planned Activities Toward Completion of Objective  

Planned Activities 

Target 
Date 

Completed? 

Completion 
Date 

1) Develop DHS-wide guidance to ensure that job announcements 
provide information about the kinds of assessments that will be used to 
evaluate candidates.  Ensure that all assessment tools used for any 
purpose have been reviewed for cultural barriers.  This does not mean 
that the assessment tools should not be used, but that they should be 
sufficiently robust in content and measurement to not penalize groups 
for cultural reasons. 

09/30/2011 
Revised to  
09/30/2013 

Yes  

09/30/2013 

2) Revise and update Reasonable Accommodation Procedures. 

09/30/2011 

Yes  

09/30/2013 

3) Follow  up  with the Components on the status of their Reasonable 
Accommodation Procedures.  

09/30/2011 

Yes  

09/30/2012 

4) Establish time tables to review the Merit Promotion Program and 
Procedures for systematic barriers. 

03/31/2015 

No 

5) Establish time tables to review its Employee Recognition Awards 
Program and Procedures for systematic barriers that may be impeding 
full participation in the program for all groups. 

06/30/2015 

No 

6) Establish time tables to review applicant process for systematic 
barriers that may impede any group form obtaining equal opportunity 
for employment. 

09/30/2015 

No 

7) Equal Employment Opportunity practitioners will assess the work 
climate to ensure that employees who have been found to have caused 
discrimination be held accountable.  Discussions around the topic will 
be incorporated with the Equal Employment Opportunity 2014 Diversity 
Management Section Diversity Briefings and Updates. 

12/30/2014 

No 

8) The Disability Program Managers will meet with managers and 
supervisors to discuss the Reasonable Accommodations Policy and the 
processing of accommodation requests. 

12/30/2015 

No 

9) EEO practitioners/staff members will meet with managers  and 
supervisors to emphasize the importance of hiring, developing,  
retaining, and effectively communicating  with employees.  Discussions 
will include review of  workforce demographics, complaint activity and 
use of alternative dispute resolution.  

06/30/2015 

No 

REPORT OF ACCOMPLISHMENTS and MODIFICATIONS TO OBJECTIVE 

Activity #3 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

48 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART H 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

A revised management directive on the topic of disability accommodations has been vetted and reviewed by the 
USCIS Director, DHS and EEOC in FY13.  Currently, the revised MD is scheduled to be reviewed with the 
agency’s union in FY15, and will make numerous changes to the USCIS process, including: 

•	  Requires management to contact the Disability Accommodation Program upon receipt of all disability 

accommodation requests, for recordkeeping purposes.  

•	  Extends the agency’s allotted processing time by five (5) business days. 

•	  Decision-maker must consult with Disability Accommodation Program before making determination to 

provide assistive technology or equipment. 

•	  Decision-maker will use a standard form to make an initial request for medical documentation, if such 

information is deemed necessary to make a determination on a request, and if other medical documentation 

was offered in conjunction with the request. 

•	  Following the closure of a request, Disability Accommodation Program will be custodian of medical 

documentation. 

•	  Decisions to approve alternative accommodations must be reviewed by Disability Accommodation Program 

Manager, in addition to denials. 

•	  Time period for making a decision on a request to reconsider a denial is increased to 14 calendar days. 

•	  To obtain compliance with Federal Accessibility Standards, USCG plans to renovate field locations:  Seattle, 

Washington.  Bathroom accessibility renovations were funded in FY14.  The bathroom renovation project 

was awarded in March 2014, with construction completion scheduled for November 2014 (first quarter 

FY15); and Sector Charleston, SC. The project addressing first floor renovations to the MSO Building is 

under construction. The project is scheduled to be completed by FY15 (First quarter). 

•	  FEMA completed its revisions to the Agency’s reasonable accommodation procedures and anticipated a 

release date of December 2014.  This update will include additional process guidance on the use of Service 

Animals, particularly (Emotional Support Animals, Therapy Animals and Comfort Animals), Telework, 

Facility Accessibility and many other Disaster Workforce-related accommodations.   

Activity #4 
•	 

ICE will convene a second meeting to discuss team members’ observations regarding the Awards, Merit 

Promotion and Training Policies, related external barrier analyses, and EEOC barrier analysis checklists. 

•	  On February 14, 2014, ICE identified three policies and programs for review.  On June 24, 2014, 

•	  ODCR drafted the EEO Barrier Identification & Elimination procedural training document to assist the 

Barrier Analysis Workgroup in understanding what barriers are, their causes and how to properly eliminate 

barriers as it pertains to merit promotion, training and development, and awards. 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

49 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART H 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

•	  TSA established two barrier analysis assessment teams composed of key agency stakeholders to identify the 

root-cause underlying two triggers:  the under-representation of females (Team A) and individuals with 

targeted disabilities (Team B) in the total workforce.  The two teams conducted a series of focus groups.  

Fourteen airports and Federal Air Marshal Field offices were identified to support development of 

recommendations. 

Activity # 5 
FEMA plans to develop, establish, and implement a process for regular evaluations of Agency awards, and to 
develop a reporting format that links demographic information to award recipients.  A new awards policy will be 
implemented across FEMA effective January 2015.  FEMA’s Office of Equal Rights reviews and evaluates 
Agency awards during each award review period.  A report is sent directly to EEO from OCCHCO that details the 
information. 

Activity #6 
•	 

ICE allocated funds to the EEO Program to ensure agency self-assessments and self-analyses per MD 715 are 

conducted annually and to maintain an effective complaint processing system.  To this end, ICE will hire 

three full-time positions and seek funding for a fourth position to achieve full operational capability.  ICE is 

currently in the process of reviewing resumes and conducting interviews. 

•	 

ICE’s newly established Barrier Analysis Workgroup will review the Merit Promotion Program Policy and 

Procedures for barriers during the second and fourth quarters of every fiscal year.  In FY15, ICE will conduct 

the first meeting of the barrier analysis workgroup and assign related tasks. 

•	 

In FY14, USCIS completed the following activities: 

o	  Reviewed at least one personnel program, policy, or procedure to determine if systemic barriers 

exist which may be impeding full participation by a particular group and develop plan to 

eliminate identified barriers, as appropriate. 

o	  Established a schedule for Office of Equal Opportunity & Inclusion/Human Capital & Training 

Cross-functional Team review of Employee Recognition Awards Program and Procedures and 

Employee Development/Training Programs for systemic barriers. 

o	  The Cross-functional Team’s Merit Promotion Program Subcommittee reviewed and provided 

feedback and recommendations to the revised Merit Promotion Program policy on March 18, 

2014, in an effort to focus revisions on strengthening diversity efforts. The revised Merit 

Promotion Program Management Directive is currently pending union negotiations.  In addition, 

the Subcommittee performed an in-depth review of all Merit Promotion selections during FY 

2013. Following meetings held on November 27, January 7, 9, 13, March 10, and 27, this 

comprehensive review included: 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

50 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART H 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 







Selections Summary 

Selections by Grade 

Selections of Individuals with Disabilities and Individuals with Targeted Disabilities 

 Highlights and Opportunities for Improvement 

 Recommendations 

o   The Subcommittee’s initial briefing to the Chiefs of the Office of Equal Opportunity & 

Inclusion/Human Capital & Training (HCT) was held on April 3, 2014. During the briefing, the 

Chiefs requested some additional analysis. The Subcommittee’s final results and 

recommendations, incorporating the additional analysis and revising the comparator of the CLF 

to the Federal Workforce were provided on September 17, 2014. 

Activity #9 
•	  Coordination and data collection for the USCIS Professional Development Program (PDP) was initiated in 

September 2014 as a first step in reviewing USCIS’s Employee and Development/Training Programs.  On 

September 29, 2014, direct access to the PDP reporting system was acquired by OEOI. Efforts are underway 

to review FY14 participation and the current policy for possible systemic barriers.  HCT collects SF-181 

forms on a voluntary basis from all PDP applicants, and will forward all forms to OEOI beginning in FY15 as 

required by USCIS policy.  The Awards/Recognition Subcommittee is scheduled to meet for the first time in 

November 2015. 

•	  USCIS also plans in FY15 to: 

o	  Develop and implement a plan that will ensure senior managers are involved in the barrier 

identification and elimination process. 

o	  As barriers are identified, solicit input and feedback from senior leadership on the means to 

eliminate barriers and enlist their support in implementing plans devised to address these 

impediments to equality of opportunity. 

•	  USCIS completed plans to distribute MD-715 report to senior leadership and encourage them to submit 

suggestions and ideas for identifying and eliminating possible barriers for triggers identified in the report. 

•	  USCIS also delivered the state of EEO briefing to senior leaders and solicit their input into barrier 

identification and enlist their assistance in identifying other triggers of which they may be aware. 

•	  As a first step towards developing and implementing a plan to involve senior managers in the barrier 

identification and elimination process, USCIS developed a standardized demographic snapshot report 

template (Diversity Dashboard) that was approved by the Chief, Office for Equal Opportunity and Inclusion 

in August 2014.  OEOI also hired a full time Management and Program Analyst effective September 22, 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

51 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART H 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

2014, who will have primary responsibility for working with senior leaders to obtain their support and more 

closely involve them in the barrier identification and elimination process. 

• 	  On April 2, 2014, the FY13 MD-715 report was distributed to all USCIS managers via a Leadership Guidance 

message.  Additionally, on April 4, 2014, the report was distributed to all USCIS employees via the USCIS 

Today publication and posted on OEOI’s intranet site which is accessible to all employees. 

•	  Due to the OEOI/HCT Cross-functional Team’s Merit Promotion Program Subcommittee’s efforts, USCIS 

developed the ability to obtain merit promotion selection data by ERI/G using both the internal human 

resources system and NFC systems effective March 31, 2014.  Efforts to capture career development data by 

ERI/G are ongoing. 

• 	  As a result of the Deputy Secretary, Alejandro Mayorkas’ initiative “The Department You Deserve,” HCT 

was tasked with providing DHS OCHCO with summaries of USCIS’s hiring transparency 

activities/accomplishments.  The weekly report provides a status of completed and planned activities related 

to the hiring and promotion process, which is one of the five areas of focus.  HCT anticipates future tasking 

on the remaining four focus areas (Training and Professional Development, Rewards and Recognition, 

Performance Management, and Communication).  The weekly reports are prepared in partnership with OEOI 

and other stakeholders. 

• 	 

In direct support of the QWI’s Hiring Transparency goal, HCT has developed a SharePoint database to track 

all efforts relative to hiring and promotion.  In addition to the Hiring Transparency database, HCT reports and 

coordinates recruitment efforts to support the DHS Coordinated Recruiting and Outreach Strategy. 

•	  At USSS, The Secret Service Uniformed Division, Office of the Chief, conducts a 2-day 

leadership/management training session for all new first-line supervisors.  Representatives from the Secret 

Service EEOD explain to new Uniformed Division Officer supervisors their roles and responsibilities for 

successful EEO program implementation. The new Uniformed Division Officer supervisors also get an 

introduction to resolving workplace conflicts, providing reasonable accommodations, participating in 

community outreach, recruitment activities, and participating in diversity initiatives. 

•	  The USSS Office of Professional Responsibility, Inspection Division, regularly conducts office inspections 

and EEOD provides information for inclusion in the resulting compliance inspection reports. 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

52 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART H 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

Part H.4– Ensure Sufficiency of Data/Document Collection or Analysis 

Statement of  Model Program Essential 
Element Deficiency  

Brief Description of Program Deficiency 

Element E – Efficiency 

Specific Deficiencies Identified by Components:  

56-Does the Equal Employment Opportunity Office provide its 
employee personnel with adequate training and experience to 
conduct the analyses required by Management Directive 715 
instructions? 

57-Has the agency implemented an adequate data collection and 
analysis system that permits tracking of the information required by 
Management Directive 715 instructions? 

58-Have sufficient resources been provided to conduct effective 
audits of field facilities efforts to achieve a model EEO program and 
eliminate discrimination under Title VII and the Rehabilitation Act? 

60-Are 90% of accommodation requests processed within the time 
frame set forth in the agency procedures for reasonable 
accommodation? 

66a-Are benchmarks in place that compare the agency’s 
discrimination complaint processes with 29CFR Part 1614? 

66c-Does the agency complete the investigations within the 
applicable prescribed time frame? 

66d-When a complainant requests a final agency decision, does the 
agency issue the decision within 60days of the request? 

68-Does the agency require all managers and supervisors to receive 
ADR training in accordance with EEOC (29 Code of Federal 
Regulations Part 1614) regulations, with emphasis on the federal 
government’s interest in encouraging mutual resolution of disputes 
and the benefits associated with utilizing ADR? 

69-After the agency has offered ADR and the complainant has 
elected to participate in ADR, are the managers required to 
participate? 

70-Does the responsible management official directly involved in the 
dispute have settlement authority? 

73-Does the agency EEO office have management controls in place 
to monitor and ensure that the data received from Human Resources 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

53 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART H 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

Statement of Model Program Essential 
Element Deficiency 

Brief Description of Program Deficiency 

is received accurate, timely, and contains all the required data 
elements for submitting annual reports to the EEOC? 

75-Does the agency identify and monitor significant trends in 
complaint processing to determine whether the agency is meeting its 
obligations under Title VII and the Rehabilitation Act? 

76-Does the agency track recruitment efforts and analyze efforts to 
identify potential barriers in accordance with the Management 
Directive 815 standards. 

Program Deficiency Analysis: 

Lack of resources and trend analyses of workforce conducted by 
race, national origin, sex, and disability.  Lack of resources to timely 
investigate Equal Employment Opportunity complaints. 

Objective: 

Expand and clarify the data collection process in order to allow DHS 
to perform accurate and comprehensive analyses in the future. 

Responsible Officials: 

Deputy Officer for Equal Employment Opportunity Programs; Chief 
Human Capital Officer 

Date Objective Initiated: 

March 30, 2008 

Target Date for Completion of Objective 

September 30, 2011 
Revised to September 30, 2015 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

54 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART H 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

Planned Activities Toward Completion of Objective 

Planned Activities 

Target Date   Completed?  

Completion 
Date 

1) Develop Department-wide automated system to capture career 
development programs.  (Table A/B12 - Participation in Career 
Development). 

09/30/2013 
Revised to 
12/30/2015 

No 

2) Coordinate with DHS Components to develop supplemental 
internal controls regarding timeliness of investigations 

09/30/2013 

Yes 

09/30/2013 

3) Coordinate with DHS Components to develop streamlined review 
processes to expedite issuance of Report of Investigations 

09/30/2013 

Yes 

09/30/2013 

4) Coordinate barrier analyses across Components through the use of 
the pending DHS Special Emphasis Program framework. 

06/31/2015 

No 

5) Provide Management Directive 715 Training to ensure compliance 
and to ensure the document serves as a useful resource for managers/ 
supervisors. 

10/31/2015 

No 

6) Develop a brochure to promote the use of alternative resolutions to 
address workplace disputes and issues. 

12/31/2015 

No 

REPORT OF ACCOMPLISHMENTS and MODIFICATIONS TO OBJECTIVE 

Activity #1: 
DHS is preparing to assemble a selection panel to select a Department-wide Enterprise Talent Management 
System.  Once this system is operational, a Department-wide automated system will be available to capture 
employee participation in career development programs.  Participation in specific programs can currently be 
reviewed manually at each DHS Component, but there is no mechanism in place to aggregate the results. 

Activities #2 & 3: 
DHS coordinated with Components to revise the Equal Employment Opportunity complaint processing 
procedures.  This coordination effort allowed DHS and Components to review and revise procedures regarding 
Equal Employment Opportunity investigations focusing on the timeliness of conducting investigations, reviewing 
and issuing equal employment opportunity reports of investigations.  The revised complaint procedures were 
issued in October 2012.  

Activity  #4: 
In FY14, DHS CRCL initiated the creation of a Department-wide Special Emphasis Program framework, which 
includes several Components that will directly aid in the broad completion of barrier analyses across the 
Components. To facilitate this, additional staff was authorized and hired within CRCL.  Full implementation is 
expected in FY15. 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

55 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART H 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

Activity # 6: 
CBP will complete development of an Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) training module which emphasizes 
the Federal government’s interest in encouraging mutual resolution of disputes and the benefits associated with 
ADR. 

USCG surpassed the EEOC recommended ADR pre-complaint resolution rate of 34 percent, achieving a 41 
percent rate. 

The USSS has an ADR program; however, the program is underutilized in the EEO Complaint Process. The 
Agency’s Pre-complaint ADR program participation continues to be far below EEOC’s target participation rate of 
50 percent.   To address this deficiency, the USSS will: 

1. Continue to encourage participation in the ADR program by Secret Service employees,  
2. Develop an ADR informational handout to be presented to the complainant during the intake process, and, 
3. Design an ADR poster and place in the headquarters building and field offices. 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

56 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM  
715-01   
PART I  

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission   
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL   
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT  

Part I: EEO Plans To Eliminate Identified Barriers
 

Part I-1: Underrepresentation 

STATEMENT OF CONDITION THAT 
WAS A TRIGGER FOR A POTENTIAL 
BARRIER: 
Provide a brief narrative describing the 
condition at issue. 

How was the condition recognized as a 
potential barrier? 

Women and several ethnic and racial groups have low participation rates in the 
overall workforce, and low hiring rates for certain major occupations, when 
compared to the Relevant Civilian Labor Force. 

A review of workforce data indicates various groups are below the Relevant 
Civilian Labor Force percentage, and the Federal average and DHS hiring goals, 
respectively. 

BARRIER ANALYSIS: 
Provide a description of the steps taken 
and data analyzed to determine cause 
of the condition. 

Workforce data are analyzed at the DHS level, at the Component level, and by  
major occupations.  Applicant flow data became available for all DHS Components  
in FY14, and is also being  used to assess the cause of the observed disparities.  

STATEMENT OF IDENTIFIED 
BARRIER: 
Provide a succinct statement of the 
agency policy, procedure or practice 
that has been determined to be the 
barrier of the undesired condition. 

Representation is driven by past hires, current recruitment, current staffing, 
retirement, and resignations.  

It appears that many of the racial disparities between the DHS workforce and the 
National Civilian Labor Force or National Relevant Civilian Labor Force are due to 
the geographic location of the jobs. 

The gender disparity has not yet been fully identified, although a study on Women 
in Law Enforcement positions at DHS was conducted in FY14, which has provided 
some insight into why DHS Law Enforcement positions may differ from Law 
Enforcement positions elsewhere. 

OBJECTIVE:  
State the alternative or revised agency 
policy, procedure or practice to be 
implemented to correct  the undesired 
condition.  

For total workforce participation/new  hires:  
Develop and implement a MD 715 data system and an applicant data tracking  
system; develop needed data tools; analyze data carefully; develop remediation  
plans; and monitor closely.  

For major occupations: 

Increase outreach methods using new media.
 

RESPONSIBLE OFFICIAL: 

OCHCO; CRCL; DHS Components 

DATE OBJECTIVE INITIATED: 

February 1, 2011 

TARGET DATE FOR COMPLETION 
OF OBJECTIVE: 

It is anticipated that this Part I will be closed in FY15.  The condition will continue 
to be monitored, and this Part I will be replaced with one that is less general and 
more targeted. 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

57 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART I 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

PLANNED ACTIVITIES TOWARD COMPLETION OF OBJECTIVE:  

TARGET DATE  

1) CRCL will identify Ethnicity Race Indicator/Gender groups underrepresented 
compared to the Relevant Civilian Labor Force for occupations over 100, including 
major/mission critical occupations. 

Track and report net change quarterly. 

 2) DHS Components and facilities will research where to conduct outreach for these 
groups in occupations with underrepresentation. 

a. Identify community colleges, colleges and universities with substantial 

populations of underrepresented groups, including:  Historically Black Colleges 
and Universities; American Indian and Alaska Native Education; Hispanic 
Serving Institutions; and all-female colleges and universities in appropriate 
majors for underrepresented occupations. 
b. Identify relevant job fairs in the service area. 
c. Identify focused media outlets to supplement national recruitment with local 

outreach. 

Quarterly, beginning 6/30/11 

Completed in FY 2012 and 
continues.

Completed in FY 2012 and 
continues. 
a. Annually, beginning 3/31/11 

b. Annually, beginning 03/31/11 
c. Annually, beginning 06/30/11 

d. Identify relevant local affinity groups and community groups for Special 

d. Annually, beginning 06/30/11 

Emphasis Program Managers to visit. 

e. Conduct focus groups meetings with employees from underrepresented groups 

e. Annually, beginning 

to determine how to improve recruitment and retention. 

f. Establish coordination with other Components regarding recruitment. 
g. Report Component recruitment needs to OCHCO. 

09/30/11, with six-month 
progress reviews 

f. Annually, beginning 06/30/11 
g. Annually, beginning 06/30/11 

3) OCHCO will implement a multi-year plan (beyond national posting) for targeted 
recruitment of applicants from the underrepresented groups in these occupations.  
(DHS Workforce Strategy Objective 2.2:  Develop a collaborative, targeted 
recruitment strategy to promote public service and to ensure outreach to diverse 
populations.) 

As appropriate, update goals annually for: 

Intern programs    
Job fairs 

x  
x  
x   Local advertising  
x   Contacts with affinity and community organizations  
x  Coordination on recruitment efforts 

Annually, beginning 09/30/11 

Completed in 2012 and  
continues. 

4) OCHCO will produce a plan to develop an applicant data tracking system, with at 
least three benchmarks per year. 

a. Conduct pilot with USA Staffing. 
b. Acquire data from Monster Government Solutions. 
c. Integrate data analysis into DHS Component barrier analysis. 

a. 03/31/14 
b. 03/30/14 
c. 09/30/14 

Data acquired in 2014, analysis 
is ongoing. 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

58 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART I 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

5) OCHCO will continue to use and promote DHS’s enterprise-wide solutions to DHS-
wide recruitment to: 

x   Assess Department-wide recruitment activities  
x   Coordinate Department-wide participation in recruitment events  
x   Develop Department-wide recruitment strategies and activities for cross-

Quarterly, beginning 06/30/11

Completed in FY 2011 and 
continues.  

cutting occupations  

6) DHS Components will use the following recruitment programs, as applicable, to 
increase the number of minority and female candidates applying for positions suitable 
for external recruitment: 

x   Hispanic Association of Colleges and Universities Internship Program  
   
x   Minority  Serving Institution Internship Program 
  
x   Presidential Management Fellows 
 
x 
x	  U.S. Office of Personnel Management’s Pathway for Students and Recent 

(USCIS) Summer Intern Enrichment Program
 

Graduates Program 
x  
(TSA) Resident Program 
x   Tuition Assistance Program   
x   Workforce Recruitment Program for College Students  with  Disabilities  
x   American University’s Washington Internships for Native Students   
x   American  Association of People with  Disabilities Federal Information  

Technology Internship Program  

x  Bender Consulting Register 

7) DHS Components will use the following recruitment methods to increase the 
number of minority and female candidates applying for positions suitable for internal 
recruitment: 

x  Post vacancy announcements on USAJOBS 
x  Use Components’ career web pages 
x  Use Components’ email broadcasting/message boards 
x  Actively engage underrepresented groups in national and 
x 
x  Outreach to relevant diverse professionals and other affinity  groups 

regional conferences 

Annually, beginning 03/31/11

Completed in FY 2012-2014 
and continues.  

Annually, beginning 03/31/11 

Completed in FY 2012 

8) DHS Components  will conduct an assessment to identify  any occupations that may  
require bilingual or bicultural capabilities and include findings and activities.  

Annually, beginning  03/31/11 

9) DHS Components will conduct an assessment of the following and report any action 
items: 
x	 

Immediate and longer range job openings for each occupational grade-level 

grouping for which underrepresentation has been determined
 

x  Hiring authorities which may be used to fill such jobs 
x	  The possible impact of its actions on underrepresentation 

Completed in FY 2012 and 
continues. 

Annually, beginning 03/31/11 

Completed in  FY 2012 and 
continues.  

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

59 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART I 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

Report of Accomplishments and Modifications to Objective 

Activity #1 
•	  DHS’ Office of the Chief Human Capital Office conducted significant research on the new Inclusion 
Quotient (IQ) research pertaining to the Federal Employee Viewpoint Survey questions, providing a 
better understanding of which Components of DHS are lacking in the five habits of inclusion (Fair, Open, 
Cooperative, Supportive, and Empowered). 

•	  CRCL conducted a study on women in law enforcement positions, utilizing personnel data, focus groups, 
and individual interviews to gain a better understanding of the challenges facing women law enforcement 
officers at DHS. 

•	  An analysis of the Department’s permanent workforce and major mission-critical occupations shows 

Blacks and Hispanics, both female and male, are more likely to be clustered in positions that do not have 
a clear career path into the senior pay grades.  Targeted recruiting can be utilized to effectively target 
ethnic and race indicator groups for these feeder positions. 

•	  National Civilian Labor Force and National Relevant Civilian Labor Force percentages were created with 
updated American Community Survey data for the first time in FY13, and updated this year based on the 
FY14 DHS workforce.   

•	  CRCL provided briefings to each DHS Component on their FY13 MD 715 report, providing customized 

advice on what occupational and demographic triggers need the most attention. 

Component-specific accomplishments included: 
CBP: 
•	  Completed an analysis of 

o	  Academy attrition by national origin, race, and sex. 
o	  Participation rates in CBP’s succession management programs by national origin, race, and 

sex. 

o	  Applicant flow data of five major occupations at CBP. 
o	  Workforce grade level distribution by disability, national origin, race, and sex. 
o	  FY11 and FY12 initial applicant pools for two of CBP’s core law enforcement occupations— 
Border Patrol Agent and CBP Officer—indicating that recruitment efforts during these years 
attracted a diverse applicant pool, including those from groups currently underrepresented in 
each occupation. 

FLETC: 
•	  Continued last year’s practice of benchmarking with the proper outside Relevant Civilian Labor Force 
benchmark for their most common occupation (Law Enforcement Instructors in the 1801 job series). 
•	  Continued to monitor the workplace and employee engagement trends through the efforts of the Office of 

Organizational Health (OOH).  The Chief is also a Senior Staff champion of FLETC’s Diversity & 
Inclusion Council.  Quarterly reports are provided to the Senior Executive team on the “State of the 
Workforce” for corporate awareness of workforce trends. 

ICE: 
On June 24, 2014, the Office of Diversity and Civil Rights drafted the EEO Barrier Identification and 
Elimination procedural training document to assist the Barrier Analysis Workgroup in understanding the 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

60 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART I 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

meaning of barriers, the causes, and how to properly eliminate barriers as it pertains to merit promotion, 

training, development, and awards.
 

TSA: 

TSA established two barrier analysis assessment teams composed of key agency stakeholders to identify the 

root-cause underlying two triggers:  the under-representation of females (Team A) and individuals with 

targeted disabilities (Team B) in the total workforce.  The two teams conducted a series of focus groups.  

Fourteen airports and Federal Air Marshal Field offices were identified to support development of 

recommendations. 


USSS: 

USSS has three Working Groups (Special Agent, Uniformed Division Officers, and Administrative, 

Professional, and Technical) to encourage open dialogue regarding workforce issues and factors that affect
 
employee satisfaction, recruitment, and retention.  These groups explore important issues that impact 

employees and the work environment, develop solutions, and provide valuable input and recommendations to
 
senior management.  Immediate action is taken to address deficiencies in various areas
 

Activities #2, 6-8 
The DHS Corporate Recruitment Council brings together key recruiting personnel across DHS. The Council 
develops a “Top 25” list annually of recruiting and outreach events that target diverse populations and events 
that are focused on law enforcement—our largest mission critical occupation. 

DHS entered memoranda of understanding (MOUs) with associations that represent diverse Higher Education 
Associations including the Hispanic Association of Colleges and Universities (HACU), National Association 
for Equal Opportunity in Higher Education (NAFEO), American Indian Higher Education Consortium 
(AIHEC), Asian Pacific Islander American Association of Colleges and Universities (APIACU), and 
American Association of Community Colleges (AACC) 

Component-Specific accomplishments included: 
FEMA: 
FEMA met with the National Council of La Raza in August 2014 to identify points of collaboration that will 
increase engagement with the Hispanic/Latino community at the community level.  Discussed ways to 
collaborate and to help emergency managers understand how to engage more with Hispanic/Latino 
communities. 

FLETC: 
•	  FLETC has formally adopted a Diversity and Inclusion (D&I) Council that incorporates its former 

FLETC Recruitment Council.  The D&I Council’s initiatives focus on ways to meet prescribed workforce 
representation goals and benchmarks.  The Council is co-chaired by the FLETC EEO Officer and the 
Human Capital Officer.  Ongoing collaboration among the FLETC’s Human Capital Division (HCD), the 
EEO Division, and the Council has developed into a viable partnership for participation in numerous 
community outreach activities, career/job fairs, and conferences at colleges and universities throughout 
the reporting year. 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

61 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART I 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

•	  FLETC outreach efforts included Minority Serving Institutions, professional organizations, colleges, that 

service students with disabilities, women’s colleges, disability related organizations, and military 
organizations. 

•	  FLETC senior level managers participated in the National Organization of Black Law Enforcement 

Executives (NOBLE) Conference and Exhibition.  FLETC’s involvement was multi-faceted.  The team 
interacted with a host of law enforcement professionals via a conference exhibit, presented the Leadership 
through Understanding Human Behavior training program and participated in NOBLE Education and 
Training Committee activities including coordination of workshops. 

•	  FLETC senior level managers participated in a Women’s History Month Panel Discussion, where the 

event was video teleconferenced to FLETC’s field sites. 

USSS: 
•	  The Office of Human Resources and Training, Recruitment Division (REC) developed and implemented 
a Recruitment and Outreach Plan that outlines strategies to ensure that the Secret Service institutes an 
effective program to build a highly qualified pool of applicants from diverse backgrounds to include 
minorities, women, and persons with disabilities. 

•	  USSS Recruitment Division participated in 310 career fairs and conference (110 colleges and universities, 
12 Historically Black Colleges and Universities, 2 Hispanic Serving Institutions, 7 African American 
organizations, 6 Asian Pacific Islander organizations, 21 Diversity organizations, 7 Hispanic 
organizations, 110 Military organizations, 4 Native American organizations, 12 women organizations, 3 
Disability/Veterans organizations and 16 other general organizations). 

•	  The Recruitment Division continued to work closely with the Office of Government and Public Affairs 
and Forensic Division to maintain a website geared towards women who are interested in a career with 
the Secret Service. 

Activity #3 
The department continues to actively implement the DHS Coordinated Recruiting and Outreach Strategy 
(CROS).  The strategy has the dual goals of increasing outreach to diverse groups and enhancing efficiencies 
in recruiting across the department.  The implementation has also focused on greater partnership between 
Component recruiting and workforce planning teams.  Currently, the DHS CROS is being updated to better 
align the goals and objectives with the DHS Human Capital Strategic Plan (FY15-FY19), enhance the 
performance metrics, and incorporate other updates commensurate to the current fiscal environment. The 
CROS continues to assist with meeting the department’s overall recruiting and outreach objectives, which 
include increasing the diversity of applicant pools, reducing duplication of effort, decreasing agency outreach 
and recruiting costs where appropriate, and presenting a unified DHS image. Additionally, data continues to 
be collected through the DHS Recruiting and Outreach Cost Tracker. 

Activity #4 
The summer of 2014 marked the first time that CRCL acquired access to applicant flow data for all DHS 
Components.  This data is available in summary table format (i.e., Table A7), and also in the record level data 
for the DHS Components that are USA Staffing clients.  Preliminary analysis of the applicant flow data 
reflects a diverse applicant pool across most occupations, with diversity diminishing slightly at the selection 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

62 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART I 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

phase for certain positions.  Because hiring slowed considerably in the last few years, it will take time for 
enough data to accumulate to allow for strong conclusions to be drawn. 

Activity #5 
This activity is conducted regularly through the Corporate Recruitment Council.  In addition, an Excel 
spreadsheet was developed in FY13 and approved in early FY14 to better track recruiting costs across DHS 
and to assist with assessing recruiting activities.  The data collected will also identify recruiting activities 
across DHS.  

Activity #9 
•	  The DHS Corporate Recruiting Council, comprised of recruiting personnel from DHS Components, 
assists in implementing the Coordinated Recruitment and Outreach Strategy.  In FY14, the Council 
continued to maintain a Top 25 list of recruiting events to attend. Due to budget constraints, focus was 
confined to attending events that targeted DHS mission critical occupations, notably law enforcement.  As 
a result, participation was coordinated across all DHS Components with the following organizations in 
FY14:  Women in Federal Law Enforcement (WIFLE); National Asian Peace Officers Association 
(NAPOA); National Organization of Black Law Enforcement Executives (NOBLE); National Native 
American Law Enforcement Association (NNALEA); Congressional Black Caucus Foundation (CBC); 
League of United Latin American Citizens (LULAC); Hispanic Associations of Colleges and Universities 
(HACU); Hispanic American Police Command Officer Association (HAPCOA).  Also, the USCG and 
USSS recruited at Society for American Indian Government Employees. 

•	 

In FY14, the Component Recruitment and Outreach Plans (CROP) were revised to enhance recruiting 
efforts to meet current and long-term needs (see Appendix 8).  The CROP is used to assess and evaluate 
Component outreach efforts for groups with low participation rates with a focus on mission-critical 
occupations. Components completed the revised templates for FY14 to include long-term staffing gap 
projections and planned strategies to fill those gaps.  This process required Component recruiters to 
collaborate with workforce planners to identify staffing gaps for two out-years.  The FY15 CROPs were 
issued to Components and are scheduled to be finalized and evaluated in preparation for the new fiscal 
year.  Additionally, an Accountability Checklist was developed and implemented to assess the CROP 
submissions for accuracy and completion. 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

63 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART I 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

Part I-2: Underrepresentation of Individuals with Disabilities/Targeted Disabilities 

STATEMENT OF CONDITION THAT  
WAS A TRIGGER FOR  A POTENTIAL 
BARRIER:   
Provide a brief narrative describing the 
condition at issue. 

How was the condition recognized as a 
potential barrier? 

BARRIER ANALYSIS:  
Provide a description of the steps taken 
and data analyzed to determine cause 

of the condition.  

STATEMENT OF IDENTIFIED 
BARRIER: 
Provide a succinct statement of the 
agency policy, procedure or practice 
that has been determined to be the 
barrier of the undesired condition. 

OBJECTIVE:  
State the alternative or revised agency  
policy, procedure or practice to be 
implemented to correct  the undesired 
condition.  

DHS has a permanent workforce representation of Individuals with Disabilities of  
5.4%.  Individuals with Targeted Disabilities are represented at 0.42%,  well below  
the Federal average of 0.88% and the 2% Federal goal.  

Low rate of hires of Individuals with Disabilities and Individuals with Targeted
  
Disabilities.  
 

Note:  This is a multi-year plan  which carries over into future years.
  

Access to a more sophisticated data reporting tool has provided better understanding 
of the causes of low participation for these groups.  While Individuals with 
Disabilities and Individuals with Targeted Disabilities, compared to those without 
disabilities, are both being hired at rates in rough proportion to their workforce 
participation rates, they are separating at much higher rates—as much as 50%  
higher than their workforce participation rate would predict.  As hiring flattens out 
in the face of new budget constraints, this high attrition rate will have more impact 
on Individuals with Disabilities and Individuals with Targeted Disabilities compared 
to those without disabilities at DHS.  Recruiting and retention efforts, therefore, are 
both of increasing importance going forward.    

Increase the representation of  Individuals with Disabilities/Individuals with  
Targeted Disabilities.  

RESPONSIBLE OFFICIAL:

 OCHCO; CRCL; DHS Components 

DATE OBJECTIVE INITIATED:

 February 1, 2011 

TARGET DATE FOR COMPLETION 
OF OBJECTIVE:

 September 30, 2011 and annually thereafter 

PLANNED ACTIVITIES TOWARD COMPLETION OF OBJECTIVE:  

TARGET DATE  

1. Implement plan for recruitment and retention of Individuals with 
Disabilities/Targeted Disabilities (Individuals with Disabilities/Individuals with 
Targeted Disabilities), in accordance with the President’s Executive Order 13548 
and U.S. Office of Personnel Management’s requirement for Model Strategies for 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

64 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART I 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

Recruitment and Hiring of Individuals with Disabilities. 

a.  CRCL and OCHCO will jointly develop DHS’s model recruitment and 

hiring strategies for increasing employment of Individuals with 
Disabilities/Individuals with Targeted Disabilities.  DHS will submit its 
final plan to the U.S. Office of Personnel Management.  This plan will 
include the following: 

x   Designate a senior-level agency official to be accountable for 
enhancing  employment  opportunities for Individuals with  
Disabilities/Individuals with Targeted Disabilities.  

x  Establish hiring goals for use of Schedule A. 

a.  March 8, 2011  
Completed 

b.  Develop strategies to retain Individuals with Disabilities/Individuals with 
Targeted Disabilities including training, use of centralized funds to 
provide reasonable accommodations, increasing access to appropriate 
accessible technologies, and ensuring accessibility of physical and virtual 
work spaces. 

b.  Revised to 6/3/14 

c.  Develop strategies to increase successful return-to-work outcomes for 
employees who sustain work-related injuries and illnesses, as defined 
under the Federal Employees’ Compensation Act. 

c. Completed in 2012 

d.  Develop mandatory training on hiring Individuals with 
Disabilities/Individuals with Targeted Disabilities. 

d.  Revised to 6/30/14 

e.	  Establish performance targets and numerical goals for major areas and 

e. Completed in 2013 

occupations. 

f.	  Develop employment counseling program to help match career aspirations 
of Individuals with Disabilities/Individuals with Targeted Disabilities. 

f. Revised to 9/30/15 

g.	  Design a system to report regularly to the President, heads of agencies, and 

public on DHS’s progress on implementing its plans and objectives. 

h.	  CRCL will review and analyze workforce data regarding Individuals with 

Disabilities/Individuals with Targeted Disabilities. 

x 

Identify trends regarding Individuals with Disabilities/Individuals 
with Targeted Disabilities (hires, awards, promotions, 
separations, etc.). 

x  Compare onboard and hires to government averages by 

x 

occupation. 
Identify occupations growing without proportionate growth in 
Individuals with Disabilities/Individuals with Targeted 
Disabilities. 

Revised to 9/30/15 

g. 
OPM routinely reports to the WH 
on federal progress in hiring and 
promoting IWD/TDs. 

h. Every six months, beginning 
3/31/11 and reporting by 6/30/11 
Completed in 2012 and continues 
New data program unavailable in 
FY 14. This activity will occur in 
FY 15.  

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

65 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART I 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

x   Review Individuals with Disabilities/Individuals with Targeted  

Disabilities in DHS career development programs.  

x   Use data tools being developed by CRCL.  
x  

Implement quarterly tracking of Individuals with Disabilities/ 
Individuals with Targeted Disabilities hires, onboard and 
separations.  

i.   CRCL  will review applicant flow data when they become available to 
identify trends regarding Individuals with  Disabilities/Individuals with  
Targeted Disabilities.  

j.   CRCL  will identify any triggers from the above sources, and develop a 

plan to address them.  

k.   OCHCO and CRCL  will benchmark current  outreach for applicants with  
targeted disabilities to identify stronger efforts that DHS can take to 
enhance DHS outreach for applicants with  disabilities.  
l.   OCHCO will identify career fairs in the service area(s).  

m.  OCHCO and CRCL will establish goals for the WRP. 

n.   OCHCO and CRCL  will monitor the management Performance Appraisal 

System diversity element.  

o.  OCHCO and CRCL will establish relations with local potential sources 

(e.g., State Rehabilitation Office, affinity groups, professional 
organizations and associations). 

p.   OCHCO will identify and train Selective Placement Coordinators.  

q.   OCHCO will coordinate Components’  recruitment.  

i.  Annually, beginning 9/30/2011  
Revised to 9/30/15  

j.  Annually, beginning 6/30/11  
Revised to 9/30/15  
k.  Annually, beginning 9/30/11  
Completed in FY13  

l. Annually, beginning 6/30/11  
Revised to 9/30/14  
m. Annually, beginning 9/30/12 
Revised to 9/30/15 
n.  Annually, beginning 9/30/11  

o. Annually, beginning 9/30/11  
Completed   
Annually, beginning 4/30/12  
Completed 4/30/12;  9/30/13; 
9/30/14  

p.  Annually, beginning 9/30/11  
 Completed 4/30/12 
 Revised to 4/30/15  
q. 9/30/13, Revised to  9/30/14  

r.   Review  DHS process for qualifying and referring  Schedule A applications 

submitted in response to vacancy announcements.  

r.   9/30/15  

2. Establish an effective program for reasonable accommodations. 

a. Survey Components for current status 

b.

 Develop systematic plan 

c. Implement plan 

a. 9/30/11 Completed 

b.

 9/30/12 Completed 

c. 9/30/13 Revised to 3/30/15 

3. Implement a training plan to be provided to managers regarding Individuals with 
Disabilities/Individuals with Targeted Disabilities responsibilities, authorities, 
Computer/Electronic Accommodation Program and reasonable accommodations.  
(DHS Workforce Strategy Objective 2.4:  Use current flexibilities and incentives, 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

66 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART I 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

and seek new authorities where needed.) 

a. Training for new  managers/supervisors, within 90 days of  entrance on duty.  

a. Ongoing, beginning 6/30/11  
Completed in  FY 2012 and 
continues.  

b. Refresher training to all managers/supervisors biannually.  

b. Ongoing, beginning 9/30/11  

c. Mandatory training  for all managers/supervisors, including toolkits.  

c. Ongoing, beginning 9/30/11 

d. Training  for HR Specialists regarding  special hiring authorities.  

d. Annually, beginning 9/30/11  

4. CRCL  will develop data tools for Individuals with Disabilities/Individuals with  
Targeted Disabilities.  

Completed 

a. Hires compared to DHS hiring goals. 

b. Promotion rate by occupation. 

c. Separation rate.   

Report of Accomplishments 

Activity #1b 

a. 3/31/11 

b. 6/30/11 

c. 9/30/11 

x  To remove any financial disincentives to supervisors and managers of hiring or accommodating 

Individuals with Disabilities, USCIS, USSS, and FEMA used central funds in their reasonable 
accommodations program.  FEMA uses central funding for new employees and managers during their 
first year, and for sign language interpreter services.  ICE received approval to run a pilot in their LA 
Field Offices. ICE plans to implement it this June and if successful have an agency wide centralized 
fund in FY16.  

Activity #1d 

x  The FLETC, USSS, CBP, USCIS, ICE, and USCG provided mandatory training programs to 

managers and supervisors.  The FLETC provided mandatory training to managers and supervisors 
through three training courses:  New Supervisor Training Program, “Employment of People with 
Disabilities: A Roadmap to Success,” and the FLETC Supervisors’ and Managers’ Training Day. 
OPM’s new training program modeled after the DHS CRCL’s Employment of People with 
Disabilities: A Roadmap to Success, mandatory for all employees that recommend, initiate, take, or 
approve any personnel actions. The OPM online course explores recruitment, interviewing, 
reasonable accommodation, and hiring individuals with disabilities. 

x   USSS also provided mandatory training to new supervisors.  USSS included discussion of Reasonable 
Accommodation Policy in all Equal Employment Opportunity training sessions for supervisors and 
managers.  Training included the Emerging Leaders Seminar; the Seminar for First Line Supervisors;  

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

67 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART I 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

New Employee Orientation; Investigative Issues Focus Group Training; Supervisor and Manager 
Training on Human Capital Division Services; Special Agent Supervisors’ Orientation Training; and 
Uniforms Division Newly Promoted Sergeants Training. 

x  As a part of the plan to increase CBP’s Employment of Individuals with Disabilities, all hiring 
managers and human resources professionals are required to take a training module on the 
employment of Individuals with Disabilities. All new CBP supervisors are required to complete “New 
Supervisor Orientation” and “Supervisor Leadership Training” (SLT).  SLT is a foundational course 
for all new CBP supervisors. During the SLT, participants are required to complete a module on EEO 
Awareness. Within the module is a section on the reasonable accommodation process, which includes 
an overview of the resources available through the Computer/Electronics Accommodation Program 
(CAP) and the Job Accommodation Network (JAN).  During FY14, 589 new supervisors completed 
the SLT course. 

x 

In FY14, 800 CBP supervisors completed the web-based training, bringing the total to 5,000 CBP 
supervisors trained since its launch in FY12, nearly half of all 10,485 CBP supervisors onboard. 

x  USCIS, in partnership with the EEOC, continued providing mandatory disability accommodation 
training for managers and supervisors, with more than 2,400 supervisors now having received this 
training since FY11. This training made officially mandatory by the USCIS Director this year, 
through a memorandum. This webinar was extended to employees this year for the first time. 
Training sessions were also conducted on Post Traumatic Stress Disorder, Schedule A, and Deaf 
Awareness. Almost 700 employees received some type of accommodations training in FY14. 

x 

ICE provided training to 2,436 managers and supervisors on disability accommodation and 
employment. ICE continues to offer its Disability 101 course through Virtual University for all 
employees. 

x  USCG issued a standard operating procedure which addressed acceptance of Schedule A applicants 

from external candidates in February of 2014. 

Activity #1e 
DHS established a goal of 1.5% for Individuals with Targeted Disabilities among all new hires in non-law 
enforcement positions. 

Activity #1f 

x 

In FY15, CRCL and OCHCO will explore developing a counseling program for Individuals with 
Disabilities. 

Activity #1j 

x 

In FY13, the U.S. Office of Personnel Management rolled out a USA Staffing Applicant Flow Data 
Pilot to test a new data file design and delivery method to provide more-meaningful information on 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

68 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART I 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

race/ethnicity and gender at the individual applicant level, while excluding any identifying 
information.  

Activity #1k 

x 

California State Northridge will be added to recruitment plans to increase recruiting efforts for 
Individuals with Targeted Disabilities. 

Activity #1l-o 

x  DHS maintains strategic partnerships with national disability advocacy groups and provides 

Components with recruitment resources for Individuals with Disabilities/Individuals with Targeted 
Disabilities.  DHS attended recruiting events at Gallaudet University. 

x  USSS sponsored a walking tour of Gallaudet University for USSS employees.  Additionally, DHS 
utilized the Workforce Recruitment Program.  USCG hired two students and USCIS hired six, and 
FLETC hired one, into temporary positions, with one USCIS student hired as a permanent.  CBP 
hired four students from the FY12 database, making it a total of 13 WRP individuals placed by DHS 
in FY14, a substantial improvement over two in FY13.  USCIS developed program guidance for 
supervisors of WRP students.  CRCL and OCHCO will establish goals for WRP.  In reviewing a 
benchmark survey of agencies using WRP successfully, it appears that all have central funding for the 
program.  DHS will explore this vehicle to increase participation in the WRP. 

x  CRCL and OCHCO will continue exploring new forms of outreach for applicants with targeted 

disabilities.  

Activity #1p 

x	  CRCL and OCHCO will provide training for Selective Placement Coordinators, all of whom are 

Human Resources Specialists in FY15. 

Activity #1q 

x	  The Corporate Recruitment Council participated in recruiting events at Gallaudet University, and 
periodic recruiting and outreach events for disabled veterans through Operation War Fighter and 
Wounded Warriors programs. 

x	  DHS Components participated in various outreach and recruiting events targeting Individuals with 

Disabilities and disabled veterans.  These included: 
x   USCIS began an initiative to recruit and hire deaf individuals into positions at  its Service Center  
locations.  Three deaf individuals were hired into permanent positions. Of the three, one was a 
Workforce Recruitment Program (WRP) student.  

x  USSS attended a recruitment fair at Equal Opportunity Program (EOP) Disability Job Fair, 
Washington, DC, and an Operation Warfighter job fair  in FL.  USSS also served as key 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

69 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART I 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

presenters at an Easters Seal Veterans Career Preparation Workshop in Md. Topics included 
resume writing and special hiring authorities.  The relationship developed into a partnership. 
Further, USSS managed a webpage developed for individuals with disabilities seeking federal 
positions.  

x	  CBP conducted 91 instances of electronic outreach to institutions of higher learning for students 
with disabilities.  In addition, CBP participated in nine onsite career fairs and 13 electronic 
recruitment events targeted towards individuals with disabilities.  Further, CBP participated in 
263 veterans and disabled veterans’ recruitment, information, and outreach events located 
throughout the Nation and abroad. 

Activity #2c 

x  CRCL continued to explore options to implement a single DHS-wide effective tracking mechanism 
for capturing all Component reasonable accommodations.  TSA’s prior Reasonable Accommodation 
Program Manager discussed the new tracking system (built in-house), which is more user-friendly 
than the current one, being piloted in three Components.  In FY14, the new TSA Program Manager 
offered to share this program with the other Components. 

x	  Reasonable Accommodations Program Managers in second quarter FY15.  A decision will then be 
made to implement either TSA’s program, or Accessibility Compliance Management System 
(ACMS). 

x	  DHS provided 2,981 reasonable accommodations to employees, including for the first time 14 

contractors in FY14.  DHS policy prohibits contractors from installing software on our systems. 
Therefore, to accommodate contractors, DHS provides accommodations to the contractors.  Of the 
total number of accommodations provided in FY14, TSA’s 810 and USCIS’s 1,149 accounted for 
66.0% of all DHS accommodations.    

x  Of the requests for reasonable accommodation, DHS Components granted 2,200 or 73.8%, denied 

119 or 4.0 %, and categorized 666 or 22.3% as “other” (i.e., closed, remanded, pending, no assistance 
required, and those withdrawn).  The most common accommodations ergonomic keyboards, telework, 
software programs for low vision, reassignment, and sign language interpreter services provided in 
FY13 were the same as those provided in FY14.  

USCIS: 

x 	  Conducted a five year trend analysis of the hiring, advancement, and retention of Individuals with 

Targeted Disabilities.  

x   Of the 1,125 requests for reasonable accommodation, USCIS  granted 1,107 or 98%.   
x  Spent $1,211,208 on reasonable accommodations using central funding.  In addition to central 

funding, other sources within USCIS included the Office of Training and Career Development, which 
pays for accommodations for employees who participate in their training programs.  Approximately 
$895,269 of the total spent on accommodations went toward providing sign language and other 
services to employees with hearing loss.  

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

70 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART I 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

x	 

Increased its Disability Accommodations Program staff from three to six,  which include a Program 
Manager, three Equal Employment Opportunity Specialists who advise on accommodation issues, 
one Equal Employment Opportunity Specialist who is responsible for implementing a multi-year plan 
to increase the hiring of individuals with targeted disabilities It also hired a Management and Program 
Analyst, responsible for processing ergonomic accommodation requests using the agency’s central 
fund to make accommodation purchases.  In addition to these six employees, the Analyst also served 
as the Contracting Officer’s Technical Representative for several program office contracts and 
provides overall management of the central accommodation fund. 

x	  USCIS substantially increased their reasonable accommodation program over the past four years due 
to demand of services.  In FY10, USCIS process 418 requests for reasonable accommodations. 
Possible explanations for this increase include: 

1)   Greater awareness of the central accommodation fund managed by  USCIS;  
2)   Managers’ improved ability to identify accommodation requests;  
3)   Management's increased responsiveness to requests for accommodations; and  
4)  More accurate tracking of accommodation requests. 

x	 

In partnership with EEOC, continued providing mandatory disability accommodation training for 
managers and supervisors, with more than 2,750 supervisors now having received this training since 
FY11. USCIS Director this year, made this training mandatory. This webinar was extended to 
employees this year for the first time. Training sessions were also conducted on Post-Traumatic Stress 
Disorder (PTSD), Schedule A Hiring Authority, and Deaf Awareness and Etiquette. 

CBP: 

x	  Of the 73 requests received during FY14, 47 were approved, three were denied, and 22 were 


withdrawn, closed, pending, requested reconsideration, or appeals. 


USCG: 

x	  The number of number of accommodation requests fell from 90 to 77 with 67 approvals and ten 

denials.  

FEMA: 

x	  Received 400 reasonable accommodation requests, with 388 approvals, eight denials, and eight in a 

pending status. Although the number of accommodation requests decreased during FY14 in 
comparison to FY13, requests became more complex due to organizational changes. Examples of 
organizational changes include changes to the Disaster Reserve Workforce, additional disaster 
employment positions, and an increase in the number of employees with disabilities.  The program 
funding was allocated as follows:  Sign Language Interpreter services $1,297.216, CART $59,906, 
and Other $3,753.  FEMA also received $11,357 for 48 products and services from 
Computer/Electronic Accommodations Program. 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

71 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART I 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

x	  FEMA continued reinforcing its responsibility in ensuring accessible disaster operations facilities 

through continued use of the accessibility checklist.  The Disability Program Manager developed an 
innovative checklist, in FY13, using the Americans with Disabilities and Architectural Barriers Act 
(ADA/ABA) guidelines as a basis to pre-identify any disaster facility barrier and compliance 
deficiencies. This easy-to-use checklist continues to effectively enhance the Agency’s ability to 
proactively address and resolve disaster facility accessibility issues. 

x	  Budget shortfalls affected the Component’s ability to identify additional personnel resources to assist 

in handling increased accommodation activity in 2014.  Funding has been identified to secure 
personnel resources in FY15. 

FLETC: 

 Received and approved 35 reasonable accommodations requests.  

x 
x  The FLETC Visitor’s Center, Building 1, was renovated in FY14.  The interior was redesigned to 
provide a smoother workflow and provide instant recognition of “where to go” to receive services. 
The reconstruction also included a station with access for those using wheel chairs. This accessible 
station displays the new international accessibility symbol. 

HQ: 

x	  DHS HQ hired a new Disability Program/RA Manager (HQ DPM) to backfill a vacant position.  The 
HQ DPM increased awareness of the HQ reasonable accommodations program. As a result, HQ 
received 273 requests. Of those requests received, only one was denied one. In FY13, of the 55 
requests received, 18 were denied. HQ spent $109,228 on providing employees with sign language 
interpreter services. 

ICE: 

x	  Continued assessing its reasonable accommodation program for increased efficiencies in both 

program and process improvements. Of the 105 requests received for reasonable accommodations, 65 
were granted, none denied, with 23 withdrawn or closed.  ICE enhanced its Disability 101 Training. 
This training is available online in the ICE Virtual University.  ICE will launch its Disability 201 (RA 
Course) as a mandatory course for managers. 

x	  The Computer/Electronic Accommodation Program provided 81 products and services to ICE, a 

substantial increase above 33 provided in FY12, saving ICE $26,186.  

TSA: 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

72 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART I 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

x   Received 810 requests for accommodations, granted 153, denied 79, leaving the remainder, 578 
designating in other categories (i.e., pending, remanded, administratively closed, closed without 
decision, and withdrawal).  

x 

Continued to provide training to first line managers and supervisors on their roles and responsibilities 
in the reasonable accommodation process through the U.S. Office of Personnel  Management of an 
On-Line Learning Center Course, teleconferences, and by providing educational material and 
communications.  TSA will continue to explore other methods of training  delivery.  

USSS: 

x	  Received and approved 23 requests for reasonable accommodations.  The Office of EEOD has 

updated the Reasonable Accommodation portion of its training to advise of the Component’s policy 
that a decision to grant or deny must be made within 20 business days of receipt of the request for an 
accommodation. 

Activity #3a-#3d 

DHS Components continued to provide training to new managers and supervisors within 90 days of entrance 
on duty. 

CBP: 

x	  Trained 800 managers and supervisors using the disability employment training program, Road Map 
to Succsess: Employment of People with Disabilities.  However, this was a significant decrease from 
3,735 trained in FY13. 

USCG: 

x	  Trained 1,049 managers, supervisors, and human resources specialists on disability program areas.  

FEMA: 

x	  Trained 1,502 supervisors and managers nationwide, on processing and providing timely reasonable 
accommodations, and recruiting and hiring individuals with disabilities.  This training also covered 
the hiring flexibilities for veterans, such as Veterans Recruitment Appointments; temporary 
appointments of 30% or more disabled veterans; the Veterans Opportunities Act of 1998; and other 
non-competitive hiring authorities.   

FLETC: 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

73 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART I 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

x	  Trained 152 managers and supervisors, a decline from 334 (or -182) in FY13, on hiring, 

accommodating, and working with individuals with disability.  The training sessions were provided 
via classroom and/or online instruction.  

x	  Provided the following courses for managers and supervisors: 

x	  Reasonable Accommodations: Change the World by Changing Your Workplace.  This workshop 
provided an understanding of discrimination concepts, how to recognize and respond to requests 
for reasonable accommodation, and accommodative solutions.  The course was presented by the 
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, Savannah Regional Office.  Attendees included 67 
managers, supervisors and employees. 

x	  Employment of People with Disabilities: A Roadmap to Success:  This mandatory course was 
provided through FLETC’s Learning Management System.   In FY14, 54 managers and 
supervisors received this  training.  

x  Diversity on the Job: The Importance of Diversity and the Changing World:  This course was 

provided through FLETC’s Learning Management System.  In FY14, 288 managers, supervisors 
and employees received this training.  

x  The EEO Division Staff attended an American with Disabilities Act Awareness Seminar on July 31, 

2014.  The discussion panel included representatives from Vocational Rehabilitation. 

HQ: 

x	  Trained 30 managers and supervisors on disability awareness, hiring, and accommodating employees 

with disabilities.   

ICE: 

x	  Scheduled quarterly tours for managers and supervisors to the Computer/Electronic Accommodation 

Program Technology Center in the Pentagon.  

USSS: 

x	  Trained 407 managers on topics related to disability employment. 
x	  While visiting Gallaudet University, our agency’s employees participated in a historical walking tour, 
received an educational briefing on deaf cultures, and gained additional insight about sign language 
classes, academic programs, and other interesting university-related facts. 

x 	  Provided reasonable accommodation and disability awareness training to managers, supervisors, and 

employees.  Below is a list  of training courses and seminars:  

x   First Line Supervisors 
x   Human Capital Division Managers and Supervisors  
x   New Employee Orientation 
x  First Line Supervisors (Uniformed Division, Special Agents, Administrative, Professional and 

Technical Supervisors) 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

74 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART I 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

x	 

x	  Uniformed Division Supervisor’s Orientation 
In these training sessions, the Equal Employment Opportunity office provided information on MD 
715, Reasonable Accommodation for Individuals with Disabilities, Religious Reasonable 
Accommodation in the Workplace, valuing and managing diversity, affirmative employment program 
initiatives, understanding Equal Employment Opportunity, special emphasis programs, prevention of 
sexual harassment, hostile work environment, Alternative Dispute Resolution, and the Notification 
and Federal Employee Anti-Discrimination and Retaliation Act, Assistive Technology Information 
was also provided on the Computer/Electronic Accommodation Program. 

x	  USSS conducted a review of its Reasonable Accommodations Policy. As a result, a working group 

was established to revise the reasonable accommodations policy to incorporate recommended changes 
in support of the Americans with Disabilities Act Amendments Act of 2008.  A draft policy will be 
finalized in FY15. 

TSA: 

x	  Trained managers and supervisors on reasonable accommodations. 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

75 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART I 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

Part I-3: High Employee Non-Retirement Separations 

STATEMENT OF CONDITION THAT  
WAS A TRIGGER FOR  A POTENTIAL 
BARRIER:   
Provide a brief narrative describing the 
condition at issue. 

The non-retirement separation rate is high and disproportionately affects certain  
groups, most notably White women. The high  separation rate also erodes efforts to 
create a workforce reflective of the nation.  

How  was the condition recognized as a 
potential barrier?  

Review of separation rates.  

BARRIER ANALYSIS:   
Provide a description of the steps taken 
and data analyzed to determine cause 

of the condition.  

DHS will perform an analysis  by  Equal Employment Opportunity protected groups 
 
and review the survey data by  Equal Employment Opportunity groups.
  

Note:  This is a multi-year plan  which carries over into future years.
  

STATEMENT OF IDENTIFIED  
BARRIER:   
Provide a succinct  statement of  the  
agency policy, procedure or practice  
that has been determined to be the 
barrier of the undesired condition.  

The Federal Employee Retirement System provides “portable” retirement benefits, 
meaning employees can take their retirement benefits  with them if  they  move to the 
private sector.  In the last few  years, the resignation rate has surpassed the 
retirement rate across the Federal government.  DHS is developing the analytic tools 
to study resignations more carefully.  An  exit  survey, first implemented  in the 
second quarter of FY11, is providing  additional insight into what is driving  
resignations and what may be done to stem the flow.  

OBJECTIVE:  
State the alternative or revised agency 
policy, procedure or practice to be 
implemented to correct  the undesired 
condition.  

Identify any trends in resignations and reduce the overall rates by improving 
employee satisfaction. 

RESPONSIBLE OFFICIAL:

 OCHCO; CRCL; DHS Components 

DATE OBJECTIVE INITIATED: 

February 1, 2011 

TARGET DATE FOR COMPLETION 
OF OBJECTIVE: 

September 30, 2015 

PLANNED ACTIVITIES TOWARD COMPLETION OF OBJECTIVE:  

TARGET DATE  

1. Develop and Implement Exit Survey.  (DHS Workforce Strategy Objectives 3.1 and 
3.5:  Use employee feedback to influence workplace policies and practices in order to 
improve employee satisfaction; Enhance employee recognition and work-life balance 
initiatives to improve employee satisfaction and retention.) 

a.  OCHCO will implement exit survey DHS-wide 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

a. 3/31/11 – Completed and 
continues 

76 

 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART I 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

b.   OCHCO will conduct preliminary review of results.    

c.   OCHCO will conduct first major review of results  

d.   OCHCO will update or augment methods as needed  

e.   OCHCO and CRCL  will identify retention interventions   

f.   OCHCO and CRCL  will implement these interventions  
x   Track interventions through this plan quarterly  

x   Evaluate as yearly data become available  
x   Make any needed corrections   
x  Conduct in-depth analysis every second year 

b. Quarterly, beginning 6/30/11  
Completed in FY 2012 and  
continues.  

c.  Annually, beginning 12/31/11 
Completed in FY 2012 and  
continues.  

d. Annually, beginning 3/31/12  
Completed and continues  
e.  Annually, beginning 6/30/12  
Completed and continues  
f. Beginning 12/30/12   
Completed and continues  

2. Use Employee Viewpoint Survey to identify changes needed to improve employee 
satisfaction. 

a. CRCL will provide FY12 Employee Viewpoint Survey results (and new yearly 
survey results as they become available) to DHS Components 

b. OCHCO, CRCL and Components will work jointly to develop plan for needed 
changes 

3. Review Promotion Data.   

a. CRCL  will determine if there are areas or occupations  with triggers in  
promotions  

a. Within two months of results 
publication 
Completed in 2013 and 
continues. 
b. Within four months of results 
publication 
Completed in 2013 and 
continues. 

Completed and continues.  

a. Annually, beginning 6/30/11  

b. CRCL  will determine if these correlate with higher resignation rates  

b. Annually, beginning 9/30/11  

c. If  yes, CRCL  will work  with OCHCO to identify interventions  

c. Annually, beginning 3/30/12 

x   Track interventions through this plan  
x   Evaluate as yearly data become available  
x   Make any needed corrections  

4. DHS Components will promote participation in their career development programs, 
academic programs, and learning training programs sponsored by their agency and/or 
government agencies.  In addition, as appropriate, Components will have access to 
training/career development programs courses through:  

x  DHScovery 

x  Online Courses 

x  Online Books 

Annually, beginning 3/31/11  
Completed in FY13 and 
continues.  

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

77 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART I 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

x  

x  

x  

(CBP) Leadership Institute  

(USCIS) Training  Academy   

(ICE) Virtual University   

(FEMA) Employment Development Division   

x  
x   FLETC Learning Management Systems  

x  

(TSA) Online Learning Center   

x   DHS CRCL Institute  
x  Naval Post Graduate School 

5. DHS will continue to promote/advertise Department-wide the Senior Executive 
Service Candidate Development and Fellows Program.  

6. DHS Components will use their agency’s Mentoring Program, if applicable, as 
another career development tool.  

Annually, beginning 3/31/11  
Completed in FY13 and 
continues.  

Annually, beginning 3/31/11  
Completed in FY13 and 
continues.  

7. DHS Components  will conduct an assessment of occupations and grade levels where  
there is substantial underrepresentation to identify skills, knowledge  and abilities by  
occupation, employees’ training  needs, and applicable career development programs.  

Annually, beginning 3/31/11  
Completed in FY13 and 
continues.  

Report of Accomplishments and Modifications to Objective 

Activity #1 

•	  DHS implemented and deployed a Department-wide web-based exit survey.  The top reasons separating employees 

listed for leaving were similar to reasons given in prior years: 

o	  Lack of advancement opportunities  

o	  Problems with supervisor/management, and 

o	  Family related/personal reasons. 

•	 

Furthermore, employees were most likely to have a problem with their second level manager, as opposed to their 

immediate supervisor or leadership.  A lack of management skills and communication skills were the most common 

problems separating employees had with their managers.  This could reflect a need to have more management 

training when promoting employees who are subject matter experts, even though they have little, if any, 

management experience. 

Activity #2 

•	  The 2014 Federal Employee Viewpoint Survey continued on a downward trend with respect to DHS employee job 

satisfaction.  Both OCHCO and CRCL are analyzing the Survey data, and the DHS leadership strongly supports 

measures to increase employee satisfaction at DHS. 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

78 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART I 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

•	  Because the Components within DHS differ greatly in terms of size, mission, and demands they place on their 

employees, Survey data is best analyzed at the Component level.  The larger DHS Components (TSA and CBP) tend 

to drive the overall results, which can mask feedback seen at the smaller Components. 

•	  The New Inclusion Quotient (New IQ) instructor certification was received by two DHS practitioners; a DHS 

version of the New IQ training was developed with projected delivery of the pilot training sessions in FY15. 

•	  DHS’s Executive Steering Committee continued to review the DHS Survey results and to make recommendations 

for improvement.  The OCHCO chairs this committee, with representatives from all DHS Components. 

Activity #3 

•	  Review of separation data showed little variation from prior years.  Non-voluntary separation by Black males and 

Black females was identified as a trigger for further analysis. 

•	  A review of promotion data shows little variation from prior years.  One encouraging finding is that for the second 

consecutive year, White females were promoted at a rate that is in proportion to their workforce participation rate. 

•	  Activity #4 

•	  DHS established the Office of Academic Engagement to leverage relationships with the academic community and 

the Homeland Security Academic Advisory Council, which will provide advice and recommendations to the 

Secretary and senior leadership on matters relating to student and recent graduate recruitment; international students; 

academic research; campus and community resiliency, security and preparedness; and faculty exchanges. 

•	  DHS Components continue to promote participation in their career development programs, academic programs, and 

learning training programs sponsored by their organization and/or other government agencies.  In addition, DHS 

employees have or will have access to training/career development courses through: 

o	  DHS’s Senior Executive Service Candidate Development Program and the DHS Fellows Program, 

which are promoted/advertised Department-wide.  

o	  DHScovery—DHS, in partnership with SkillSoft, offers almost 20,000 online learning resources.  

These online resources can be used as quick references, as practical job aids to gain in-depth 

knowledge, or to practice skills.  These resources are subject to mapping to support competencies, job 

roles, or blended learning offerings. 

o	  Leadership Development Channel is a resource that includes videos with the most current ideas, 

information, and know-how on business and leadership topics to address the informal learning needs of 

an organization. 

•	  Eight of nine DHS Components have a formal Career Development Program. 

Activities #5-#6 

•	  Advertising for Senior Executive Service Candidate Development Program and DHS Fellows is ongoing via email, 

the DHS website, and other avenues of communication. 

•	 

FY14 marked the first year that all nine DHS Components have formal mentoring programs in place.  

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

79 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART I 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

•	  All DHS Components will provide training to mentors, evaluate the program, and provide feedback on its successes 

and areas of improvement. 

Activity #7 

•	  Analysis was conducted of the Senior Executive Service Candidate Development Program and the DHS Fellows 

Program as feeder pools. 

o	  The DHS SES Candidate Development Pool Cohort III commenced August 2014 

o	  Women participation rates have increased from Cohort I (34.1%) to Cohort III (36.2%) 

o	  Hispanic/Latino participation rates have significantly increased from Cohort I (2.3%) to Cohort II 

(8.5%) 

o	  Participation rates for Blacks/African Americans have also increased (from 13.7% to 17.0%) 

o	  19.1% of the participants are Veterans and 4.3% of Veterans with Disabilities are participating in this 

Cohort 

•	  CRCL conducted a study for the newly established Women Executives (WE) at DHS, an employee advocacy group.  

The study identified the composition of Executive feeder pools in each of the DHS Components, and how males and 

females differed in whether they were hired into Executive positions from the outside, or converted internally.  The 

study yielded results that require follow-up analysis.  One problem assessing Executive hires pertains to insufficient 

amount of data points created in any particular year. 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

80 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM  
715-01   
PART J  

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission   
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL   
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT  

Part J – Employment of Individuals with Disabilities
 

PART I 
Department or 
Agency Information 

PART II 
Employment Trend 
and Special 
Recruitment for 
Individuals With 
Targeted Disabilities 

1. Agency 

1. U.S. Department of Homeland Security 

1.a. 2nd Level Component 

Enter actual number 
at the ... 

... beginning of FY. 

... end of FY. 

Net Change 

Number 

% 

Number 

% 

Number  Rate of Change 

Total Work Force 

183,660 

100.00 

179,256 

100.00 

-4,404 

-2.40% 

Reportable Disability 

8,713 

4.74 

9,372 

Targeted Disability* 

682 

0.37 

752 

5.23 

0.42 

659 

70 

7.56% 

10.26% 

* If the rate of change for persons with targeted disabilities is not equal to or greater than the rate of 
change for the total workforce, a barrier analysis should be conducted (see below). 

1. Total Number of Applications Received From Persons With 
Targeted Disabilities during the reporting period. 

2. Total Number of Selections of Individuals with Targeted Disabilities 
during the reporting period. 

Data Unavailable 

26 

PART III Participation Rates In Agency Employment Programs 

Other Employment/ 
Personnel Programs 

TOTAL 

Reportable 
Disability 

Targeted 
Disability 

Not Identified 

No Disability 

# 

% 

# 

% 

# 

% 

# 

% 

1. Non-Competitive Promotions 

The workforce data system did not easily distinguish between competitive and non-competitive 
promotions.  Additionally, TSA is an excepted service agency and does not utilize traditional Nature 
of Action and Authority codes seen in this data system to track promotions.  Please refer to each 
DHS Component’s Management Directive 715 report for this information. 

2. Career Development Programs 

Career development training is currently not tracked on the workforce data system.  Please refer to 
each DHS Component’s Management Directive 715 report for this information. 

2.a. Grades 5 - 12 

2.b. Grades 13 - 14 

2.c. Grade 15/SES 

3. Recognition and Awards 

3.a. Time-Off Awards 

59,407 

3,379 

5.69 

243 

0.41 

2,614 

4.40 

53,414 

3.b. Cash Awards 

114,635 

5,330 

4.82 

403 

0.35 

4,633 

4.04 

104,472 

3.c. Quality-Step Increase 

898 

87 

9.69 

6 

0.67 

24 

2.67 

787 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

89.9 

91.1 

87.6 

81 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART J 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

Special Program Plan for the Recruitment, Hiring, and Advancement 
of Individuals with Targeted Disabilities 

Part IV  
Identification  
and Elimination 
of Barriers  

Agencies with 1,000 or more permanent employees  MUST conduct a barrier analysis to address any  
barriers to increasing employment opportunities  for employees and applicants  with targeted disabilities 
using FORM 715-01 PART I. Agencies should review their recruitment, hiring, career development, 
promotion, and retention of individuals with targeted disabilities in order to determine  whether there are any  
barriers.  

Numerical Hiring Goal 
 

Types of Numerical Goals  

Goal Used?  

Goal (# or %)
 

% of Individuals with Targeted Disabilities in  
Total Workforce  

# of Individuals with Targeted Disabilities in New  
Hires  

% of Individuals with Targeted Disabilities in  
New Hires  

Yes 

No

No

1% 

Part V  
Goals for  
Targeted 
Disabilities  

Agencies with 1,000 or more permanent employees are to use the space provided below to describe the 
strategies and activities that will be undertaken during the coming  fiscal  year to maintain a special 
recruitment program  for individuals with targeted disabilities and to establish  specific goals for the 
employment and advancement of such individuals. For these purposes, targeted disabilities  may be 
considered as a group. Agency goals should be set and accomplished in such a manner as will affect 
measurable progress from the preceding fiscal year. Agencies are encouraged to set a goal for the hiring of  
individuals with targeted disabilities that is at least as high as the anticipated losses from this group during  
the next reporting period, with the objective of avoiding a decrease in the total participation rate of  
employees with  disabilities.  

Goals, objectives and strategies described below should focus on internal as well as external sources of 
candidates and include discussions of activities undertaken to identify individuals with targeted disabilities 
who can be (1) hired; (2) placed in such a way as to improve possibilities for career development; and (3) 
advanced to a position at a higher level or with greater potential than the position currently occupied. 

1. Recruitment/Hiring: 

x 

Implement plan for recruitment and retention of Individuals with Disabilities and with Targeted 
Disabilities, in accordance with the President’s Executive Order  13548 and the U.S. Office of  
Personnel Management’s requirement for Model Strategies for Recruitment and Hiring of Individuals 
with Disabilities. 

x   Establish performance targets and numerical goals for major areas and occupations.  
x   Establish targets by Components to fully participate in the Workforce Recruitment Program.   
x   Expand the number of outreach and recruiting events. 
x   Establish national contacts  to move the program beyond Washington, D.C. 
x   Expand the use of centralized funds to provide reasonable accommodations.  
x   Ensure  that tentative job  offers include information about availability of reasonable accommodations.  

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

82 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART J 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

x 	  Publicize best  practices in  recruiting Individuals  with Disabilities and Individuals  with Targeted  

Disabilities. 

2. Training:  

x   Provide attitudinal  training to address possible unconscious biases (e.g., myths and  stereotypes about 

the qualifications of Individuals with Disabilities).  

x  Provide mandatory training to managers on hiring Individuals with Disabilities and Individuals with 

Targeted Disabilities.  

x	  Continue to provide training opportunities to Human Resources and Equal Employment Opportunity 
Specialists, DHS Staffing, Disability Program Managers, Reasonable Accommodations Program 
Managers, Selective Placement Coordinators, and Hiring Managers on all aspects of the disability 
arena:  including recruiting, interviewing, using hiring authorities, career development, accessing the 
Computer/Electronic Accommodation Program, and providing reasonable accommodations.  
x	  Training announcements should include statements that reasonable accommodations are available 

upon request. 

3. Career Development/Promotion: 

x	  Beginning on March 30, 2011, and annually thereafter, OCHCO began conducting an assessment of 

the internal availability of candidates from underrepresented groups for job advancement 
opportunities.  The assessment includes job-related skills, knowledge, and abilities that may be 
obtained at lower levels in the same or similar occupational series, or through other experience.  The 
assessment also includes education levels.  

x   Promote the Computer/Electronic Accommodation Program to retain employees with disabilities.  
x  
Implement one program for consistent, uniform tracking and monitoring DHS’s reasonable 
accommodation program.  

x  Explore sponsoring a career-counseling event for employees with disabilities, modeled on a new 

program instituted at FEMA for all employees. 

COMPONENT ACCOMPLISHMENTS 

CBP: 

•	   Used Schedule A to  hire 23 Individuals with Disabilities.   

•	   CBP continued the implementation of its multi-year Plan to Increase the Employment of Individuals with 

Disabilities.   The Plan outlines the strategies and actions CBP will take to increase the number of 

individuals with disabilities from 2.68 percent of the workforce to  3.2 percent by the end of FY 2017.  As  

of the end of FY 2014, individuals with disabilities represent 2.8 percent of CBP’s workforce. During FY  

2014, CBP hired 45 individuals with disabilities, including two (2) individuals with targeted disabilities.  

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

83 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART J 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

In addition, a web link to the CBP internet website is also included so individuals can view the procedures 

for receiving and facilitating requests and submit an electronic request form. 

•	 

In July 2014, CBP issued a memorandum to all supervisors to commemorate the anniversary of the 

Americans with Disabilities Act and Executive Order 13548 – Increasing Federal Employment of 

Individuals with Disabilities.  The memorandum promoted the Office of Personnel Management’s 

Schedule A training video, “Hiring People with Disabilities Made Simple,” and the Department of 

Labor’s guidance on how Agencies can assess their hiring process and ensure that it is a positive 

experience for all applicants. 

•	  Developed a process and procedures for notifying prospective employees of their right to request 

reasonable accommodations in their final selection letters. 

•	  Completed partnership in the U.S. Department of Labor’s Office of Disability Employment Policy’s 

Alliance Initiative.  This agreement had supported CBP’s affirmative action plans for employing 

Individuals with Disabilities.  Specifically, the Alliance reviewed newly developed policies and practices, 

along with training and messaging related to the CBP disability-related and 508-related efforts.  

Additionally, they shared best practice information on mentoring programs and employee resource 

groups. 

•	  Two Selective Placement Program Coordinators are assigned to CBP’s Office of Human Resources 

Hiring Centers.  They also serve as liaisons to applicants requesting a reasonable accommodation or CBP 

supervisors requiring information or guidance. 

•	  Continued to promote CBP’s first all-employee Mentoring Program to provide opportunities for all CBP 

employees to seek career advice for reaching their fullest potential from trained mentors they have 

personally selected.  CBP believes that this mentoring program will serve as an integral part of career 

development and professional growth for all CBP employees.  CBP is working to insure that employees 

with disabilities are afforded every opportunity to participate in the mentoring program.  

•	  Sponsored 49 programs around the country in support of National Disability Employment Awareness 

Month, which had a total of 4,138 attendees, including 196 managers.   

•	  Distributed materials on its intranet website (CBP.net) and publically on its internet website (CBP.gov) to 

honor the contributions of workers with disabilities and inform the workforce that they represent a highly 

skilled talent pool to help CBP complete it homeland security mission.   CBP launched a Disability 

Resources Webpage, which serves as a clearinghouse of disability related information.  The webpage was 

promoted to, and is accessible by, all CBP employees.  Some of the resources include information on 

CBP’s work life programs, accessibility, and training and development. 

•	  Provided Privacy and Diversity Office staff with training on disability etiquette from the Co-Director of 

the JAN. JAN is the leading source of expert guidance on workplace accommodations, disability related 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

84 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART J 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

legislation, and disability  employment issues.  This training included tips on interacting with employees 

with disabilities, addressed myths about disabilities, and provided ideas on how to improve accessibility.  

•	  Developed and promoted a webinar version of the disability etiquette training so that all members of the 

CBP workforce could benefit from the information.  

•	  Premiered its first public internet webpage (www.CBP.gov) to promote CBP’s disability employment 

program.  The public facing page provides information on the steps to apply for a position with CBP 

using the Schedule A hiring authority, information on reasonable accommodations, and various links to 

disability employment related resources.  The internet webpage can be accessed at: 

http://www.cbp.gov/careers /outreach-programs/hiring-persons-disabilities. 

•	  Placed 18 employees through Operation Warfighter. 

USCIS: 

•	  Used Schedule A to hire 29 Individuals with Disabilities, the highest in the department. 

•	 

In early FY 2014, USCIS added three additional employees and now has a staff of six employees: the 

Program Manager, three EEO Specialists who advise on accommodation issues, one EEO Specialist who 

is working on a multi-year plan to increase the hiring of individuals with targeted   disabilities, and a 

Management and Program Analyst (MPA) who tracks and effectuates accommodation purchases using 

our central accommodations fund.  In addition to these six employees, OEOI's MPA also serves as the 

Contracting Officers Representative (COR) for several Disability Accommodations Program contracts 

and provides overall management of the central accommodation fund.  

•	  USCIS designated an employee to work exclusively on a new IWTD initiative, which culminated in a 

draft Strategic Plan. 

•	  Training sessions were also conducted on Post Traumatic Stress Disorder, Schedule A, and Deaf 

Awareness.  Almost 700 employees received some type of accommodations training in FY14. 

•	  Maintained a central budget to fund disability accommodations so that hiring managers would not have to 

consider cost constraints when selecting Individuals with Targeted Disabilities, who may need costly 

accommodations. 

•	  Promoted Video Remote Interpreting as an option to fulfill needs for sign language interpreter services. 

•	  Employed 1,411 individuals with disabilities, or 10.85% of the USCIS workforce, an increase from 1,292 

Individuals with Disabilities or 10.19% of the USCIS workforce in FY113. 

USCG: 


DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

85 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART J 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

•	  Due to an innovative resurveying approach, USCG has the highest participation rate of Individuals with 

Targeted Disabilities at 1.94%, almost triple the rate seen in FY13, when they reported10.31% Individuals 

with Disabilities onboard, then second highest in DHS.  DHS’s Office for Civil Rights & Civil Liberties 

drafted a memorandum to share USCG’s methodology with all DHS Components 

•	  Hired five students, from the Workforce Recruitment Program as temporary employees.  This represents 

an increase from three in FY13.  

•	  Used Schedule A to hire five individuals with disabilities, an increase of two from FY13. 

FEMA: 

•	  Placed two employees through Operation Warfighter.   

•	  FEMA placed no Schedule A hires in FY14, a decline from 12 in FY13.  

FLETC: 

•	  Reported DHS’s highest participation rate of 11.69%, and small increase from 11.46% for Individuals 

with Disabilities in FY13. 

•	  The EEO Director briefed the Chief Financial Officer on the “State of the Directorate.”  Additionally, site 

visits were conducted at the FLETC Charleston, South Carolina and Cheltenham, Maryland sites.  The 

briefing and site visits included a breakdown of EEO cases, reasonable accommodation cases and 

demographics of race, gender and national origin. 

•	  The EEO Director will continue to complete reviews of directives issued during the reporting period to 

determine whether FLETC policies impact the recruitment, retention, career development and promotion 

of protected groups including PWD and PWTD. 

•	  The FLETC EEO Office participated in the 2014 Annual Spring Fling with the Mayor’s Committee for 

Services for the Disabled, Inc.  The event is provided for disabled citizens (of all ages and disabilities) 

and the general public to gather together for an afternoon of free food, activities, live entertainment, and 

an opportunity to obtain information from local businesses and organizations that provide disability-

related services and products.  The EEO staff served food and interacted with individuals attending and 

working the function. 

•	  Placed two Operation Warfighters. 

•	  Used Schedule A to hire three Individuals with Disabilities 

HQ: 

•	  Used Schedule A to hire three Individuals with Disabilities 

•	 

Increased participation of an Individual with Disabilities incrementally from 8.33% in FY13 to 8.37. 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

86 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART J 

ICE: 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

•	  Placed 29 Operation Warfighters in a variety of temporary positions, and hired four into permanent 

positions.  

•	  Hired a new Disability Program/Reasonable Accommodation Program Manager. 

•	  Used Schedule A to hire one Individual with Disabilities in FY13, none in FY14. 

USSS: 

•	  Used Schedule A to hire one individual with a disability. 

•	  The Disability Recruitment Program manager launched an aggressive agency-wide initiative entitled, 

“Together We Fulfill the Mission”.  This advertisement campaign emphasizes the agency’s commitment 

to a workforce that is reflective of the nation and inclusive of all individuals without regard to race or 

gender, ethnicity or disability, religious beliefs, age or sexual orientation; and demonstrates an 

appreciation for the diverse talent and skillsets of current Secret Service employees.  The Together We 

Fulfill the Mission video illustrates a range of Secret Service occupations and the diverse talent in the 

agency’s law enforcement, administrative, professional and technical staff.  This advertisement campaign 

will showcase at career fairs, symposiums and information sessions attended by Recruitment personnel. 

The campaign will run quarterly in various Secret Service locations inside and outside of the National 

Capital region. 

•	  The Human Capital Division has now included a 1 hour training session for Hiring Managers and 

Supervisors entitled, “Your Roadmap to Effectively Hiring Individuals with Disabilities” into the existing 

annual Seminar.  During the course, Supervisors and Managers learn about the Schedule A process, 

reasonable accommodation procedures for current employees and applicants, and improper and/or illegal 

procedures and actions when interview individuals with disabilities. 

o	  Sponsored their fourth annual Unity Day celebration titled:  “Enhancing our Strength by 

Keeping the Flame Alive” on July 10, 2014.  The Unity Day Disability Program Committee 

hosted the following exhibits and provided useful information to all employees about the 

agency’s Disability Program: 

o	  The Department of Homeland Security’s (DHS) Office of Accessible Systems & Technology 

team demonstrated a variety of assistive technology products (ergo keyboards, mice, smart 

phones, tablets, PCs and e-readers). 

o	  The Hugh Gregory Gallagher Motivational Theatre team performed the following monologue 

titled:  “Inside Rosy’s White House:  An Afternoon with FDR.”  This performance 

highlighted FDR’s role as a model for persons with disabilities – a topic which has been 

debated for more than 60 years. 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

87 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
EEOC FORM 
715-01 
PART J 

U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
FEDERAL AGENCY ANNUAL 
EEO PROGRAM STATUS REPORT 

•	  Provided a tour of the Disability Program Room, which had many educational displays highlighting 

various disabilities throughout the American culture including braille, sign language, autism, learning 

disorders, dyslexia, and obsessive compulsive disorder.  Exhibits also featured photographs of famous 

persons and/or celebrities with disabilities.   

TSA: 

•	  Placed eight Operation Warfighters, an increase of one from FY13. 

•	  Achieved a 4.03% Individuals with Disabilities and 0.27% Individuals with Targeted Disabilities goal, a 

decline from the 4.15% Individuals with Disabilities and 0.28% Individuals with Targeted Disabilities 

actually onboard in FY13. 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 
MANAGEMENT DIRECTIVE 715 ANNUAL REPORT – FY 2014 

88 

 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
'.;'S

..'~

\·~··.1

:p M

FEDERAL EMER~~~~~y

.
ANAGEMENT

HR-ER

Employee Performance System

Foreword

and challenge
I recognize that FEMA employees are our greatest asset and the

The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Employee Performance System
seeks to create a developmental climate by encouraging growth, opportunity,
for all FEMA employees.
cornerstone of the Agency's
skilled employees and a professionally trained workforce to achieve the organizational
excellence necessary to guarantee quality service to the public. The provisions of the
FEMA Employee Performance System are directed to this purpose as they· are set forth in
this manual and related documents ..

FEMA is committed to developing highly

renewal program.

cfd&/-? oP iefrJiPJ .

..

.

James L. Witt
Director

Distribution:

J (AllPersHqFld)

:('.

i May 15,

1996

!FEMA Manua13700~2

Contents

Foreword
Contents.

Chapter' 1 - General Information

Purpose
Applicability and Scope
Supersession
Authorities
References
Policy
Responsibilities
Definitions
Records

Chapter 2 - Employee Performance System

Employee J?erformance Plans
Performance Cycle
Quarterly Reviews
Correctiflg Unacceptable Performance
Annual Ratings of Records
Impact of Ratings
Evaluations of Employees on Detail, Temporary Promotions
Employee Assessment of Supervisor
Appeal of Rating of Record

Appendixes

A - FEMA Form 30-60, Employee Performance Plan
B - FEMA Form 30-60A, Supplemental Performance Plan for

Supervisors/Managers

C - FEMA Form 30-60B, Employee Performance Plan Comments
D - FEMA Form 30-60C, Assessment of Immediate Supervisor

Page

Paragraph

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
4

5
5
6
7
7
8
8
9
9

1-1
1-2
1-3
1-4
1-5
1-6
1-7
1-8
1-9

2-1
2-2
2-3
2-4
2-5
2-6
2-7
2-8
2-9

May 15. 1996

FE.J.'1A Manual 3700. 2.

EMPLOYEE PERFORMANCE SYSTEM

Chapter 1

General Information

1-1. Purpose: This document establishes the policies and procedures for the Federal
Emergency Management Agency's
promotes and supports individual and organizational development and enhancement.

(FEMA) Employee Performance System (EPS) willch

1-2. Applicability and Scope: Covered under this EPS are all General Schedule (GS/GM) and·
is expected to exceed 90 days in a
Prevailing Rate employees in FEMA for willch employment
-
consecutive 12-month period. Excluded from this system are: employees in the Senior
Executive Service, Presidential Appointees requiring Senate confIrmation; employees hired
under the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act, P.L. 93-288 as
amended; and all temporary and excepted service employees for which employment
reasonably expected to exceed 90 days in a consecutive 12-month period.

is not

1-3. Supersession:
Tills EPS supersedes FEMA Manual 3700.1, Performance Management
Plan, dated March 9, 1987, for FEMA employees covered in paragraph 1-2 above, with the
exception of bargaining unit employees located at Headquarters, Region 4, Region 7, and
Region 9.

1-4. Authority: Title 5, United States Code (U.S.C.), Chapter 43.

1-5. References: Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Parts 293,430,432,451,
531, 536, 752.

530,

FEMA is committed to developing highly skilled employees and aprofessional1y

1-6. Policv:
trained work force to achieve the organizational excel1ence nec~ssary to guarantee quality
service to the public. The EPS is designed to improve employee and organizational
performance through enhanced communication between staff and supervisors.

1-7. Responsibilities:

a. Employees

are responsible

for:

(1) Performing assigned duties in a proficient manner;

.

(2) Assisting in the identification of developmental

job-related activities or training

experiences willch could enhance performance;

1

FEMAHanual-3700.2

• May 15, 1996

(3) Certifying receipt of performance plans, quarterly reviews, and annual ratings;

(4) Seeking clarification of performance expectations and outcomes, as appropriate,

throughout

the year, but at a minimum during quarterly reviews;

(5) Using supervisors'
to improve or enhance performance;

feedback and suggestions in seeking developmental opportunities

(6) Providing supervisors with candid feedback and commentary; and,

(7) Completing, on a voluntary basis,

the annual Employee Assessment of Supervisor

included in this system.

b. First-Level Supervisors are responsible for:

(1) Communicating clearly employee work assignments and performance

expectations;

(2) Ensuring that performance plans are supportive of the Agency's mission by

reviewing and updating them as needed;

(3)

Identifying and planning developmental
experiences with employees to improve or enhance performance;

job-related activities or training

(4) Sched~ling and conducting quarterly reviews in a timely manner

to discuss

performance and to solicit feedback;

(5) Rating .employees' performance;

(6) Addressing individual performance problems in a timely manner;

(7) Recognizing and rewarding employee accomplishments, where warranted;

and,

(8) Providing a copy of the completed Employee Performance Plan to OHRM at the

end of the performance cycle.

c. Second-Level Supervisors are responsible for:

(1) Reviewing Employee Performance Plans atthe beginning of the performance

cycle;

(2) Ensuring that the first level supervisor's

evaluation of subordinate

staff is

consistent with the requirements of EPS.

2

Hay 15, .1996·

F~~ Manual 3700.2

(3) Approving ratings of record of Unacceptable and Superior and ensuring that such

ratings are supported with proper justification; and

(4) Distributing Employee Assessment of Supervisor

form to employees. Collecting,

reviewing and summarizing completed assessments. Discussing
first-level supervisors.

summary of assessments with

d. Office of Hwnan Resources Management (OHRM) is responsible

for:

(1) Administering EPS and maintaining annual performance plans and other associated

records.

(2) Providing advisory services to all employees, supervisors,

and managers

concerning the EPS; and,

(3) System monitoring, oversight, and evaluation.

e. Preparedness, Training and Exercises Directorate (PT&E) is responsible for:

(1) Orienting and training supervisors, managers, and employees on the new system;

and

(2) Conducting ongoing training to update skills for supervisors and employees.

1-8. Definitions:

a. Employee Peifonnance Plan: A set of written expectations of work accomplishment

and skills development. The Employee Performance Plan defines the performance
an employee in terms of performance criteria.

expected of

b.· Peifonnance Criteria: A component of the performance plan that defmes employee

performance responsibilities
quarterly by the supervisor and employee. The performance criteria meet the requirements
critical and non-critical elements, as described in 5 CFR §430.203.

and expectations. The performance criteria are reviewed

for

c. Critical Peiformance Criteria: A performance criterion of such importance that

in the criterion would result

unacceptable performance
overall performance is unacceptable. All employees have a minimum of 4 critical performance.
criteria which include:
Service. Supervisory employees have a minimum of 8 critical performance
addition to the first four for all employees, Staff Communications, Staff Management, Staff
Development and Equal Opportunity are also included.

Job Knowledge, Completing Tasks, Quality of Work and -Customer

in a determination that an employee's

criteria.

In

·3

FEMA Manual 3700.2

May 15, 1996

d. Non-Critical Peiformance Criteria: A component of an employee's position which
does not meet the defInition of a critical performance criterion, but is of sufficient' importance
to warrant written appraisal.

e. Peiformance Cycle: The established period of time for which performance will be

reviewed and a rating of record will be issued. For the purposes of the Employee
Performance System, the performance cycle is one year.
has not had the opportunity to perform under a Perforinance Plan for 90 days, the rating
period is extended until the minimum 90-day period is completed.

In those cases where an employee

f. Quarterly Review: Ameeting which occurs four times during the performance cycle

where the supervisor and employee discuss work performance, skill levels, and career
development.

g. Final Rating: The final annual rating given for a specific criterion.

h. Rating of Record: The overall rating for the performance cycle. This rating is the

final rating for the performance cycle and represents the offIcial evaluation of the employee's
performance based on the combined fmal ratings for each performance criterion. The rating of
record may be used as the basis for determinations including, but not limited to, the following:
within grade increases, awards, and reductions in grade.

i. Unacceptable: A rating where the employee has failed to perform at a proficient level

in one or more of the critical performance criteria. An unacceptable Rating of Record must
contain the second level supervisor's concurrence. Unacceptable performance requires the
. initiation of specific corrective measures mandated by law. ConSistent with 5 CFR
§430.208(d), a rating of record of Unacceptable equates to "Level I".

j .. Proficient: Performance in which the employee consis!ently performs in an acceptable

manner, as described in·the Employee Performance Plan. Consistent with 5 CFR
§430.208(d), a rating of record of Proficient equates to "Level 3".

k. Superior: Performance in which the employee consistently demonstrates unusual
initiative in performing job responsibilities and consistently performs ina manner which is
significantly beyond what is expected by the supervisor. This rating represents a level of
performance of such unusually high quality, that it would normally occur only among.a small
p~rcentage of employees performing under similar conditions. Consistent with 5 CFR
§430.208(d), a rating of recor~ of Superior equates to "Level 5".

1-9. Records: Employees' Performance Plans and ratings will be retained in OHRMin the
Employee Performance File (EPF) in accordance with FEMA Manual 5400.4, Records
Disposition Schedules and Files Plan (pER-25-1-1).

4

Nay 15; 1996

•FEHA Hanual 3700.2·

Chapter 2

Employee Performance System

2-1. Employee Performance Plan:

a. The standard performance plan for all employees includes 10 performance

criteria:
Job Knowledge, Completing Tasks, Quality of Work, Customer Service, Problem Solving,
Communication,
Development. These criteria apply to all positions regardless of title, series or grade. See
Appendix A for a description of the criteria.

Improving Work Processes; Coordination, Team Work, and Professional

Performance Plans for supervisory/managerial
eight additional performance criteria that relate to supervisory/managerial
the position: Staff Communications, Staff Management, Staff Development, Equal
Opportunity, Program Management, Delegation of Work, Resource Management,
Creativity and Innovation.

See Appendix B for a description of the criteria.

employees contain the above 10 criteria, plus
of

responsibilities

and

b.

Individuals are evaluated against performance criteria identified in the performance

If performance expectations are unclear,

and it is incumbent on employees and supervisors

plan in comparison with assigned job responsibilities. Major ctLitiesand responsibilities
defined in position descriptions,
that position descriptions are accurate.
and supervisor should discuss this matter, and the performance
clarified. This could be reduced to writing and may detail specific job requirements,
performance requirements
(time-frames, quantity, etc.) and/or subject areas not sufficiently
addressed by the standard performance criteria. The intent of the EPS is to use the standard
performance plans without modification, except in unusual circumstances.
circumstances,
modifications

In unusual
job-specific requirements can be added .. Effort will be made, however,
to a minimum.

are
to ensure
the employee
should be further

expectations

to keep

re~ative to mission requirements, performance expectations,

c. Employee Performance Plans will be issued within 30 days of an employee's

entrance
on duty, reassignment or detail to new duties reasonably expected to last more than 90 days,
or the beginning of anew performance cycle. Supervisors and employees will meet to discuss
job responsibilities
development. These discussions will include the topics of skills development
with assigned expectations) and career objectives.
whether or not a supplemental written statement will be needed to clearly communicate job
responsibilities and/or performance expectations. The employee will acknowledge receipt by
signing the performance plan.
plan,
days before it can be used to prepare an official rating of record.

the reason should be noted on the plan. A performance plan must be in effect at least 90

If the employee disagrees with any aspect of the performance·

These discussions will also determine

and career
(commensurate

2-2. Performance Cycle: The performance cycle is one year and coincides with the fiscal.

5

FEMA Manual 3700.2

May 15, 1996

year. The starting date of the performance cycle is October 1. The performance cycle ends
the following September 30.

2-3. Ouarterly Performance Reviews: First-level supervisors and employees will meet
quarterly to discuss work performance
requirements. All quarterly reviews should be scheduled,
beginning of the performance cycle, staggered throughout
employee will certify that the review has taken place by initialing the performance plan at the
end of each quarterly meeting. Quarterly review meetings should take place within 2 weeks of
the specified review dates.

to the extent possible, at the
the year. Both supervisor and

and the employee's ability to meet his/her

a. During the quarterly review,

the supervisor

is responsible for:

(1) Providing clear, candid, and constructive· feedback about the employee's

performance,

considering botb work accomplishments··and the development of necessary skills;

(2) Discussing mission and organizational

requirements and identifying employee's

strengths and goals in support

tbereof; and

(3)

Identifying areas where employee's performance needs improvement or is

unacceptable.

b. Performance relative to each criterion will be judged by the supervisor

to be either On

Target (OT) or Less Than Expected (LTE):

(1) "aT"

indicates tbat performance in this criterion is at least acceptable and the

employee's progress over the previous quarter is on target;

(2) "LTE" notifies the employee that his/her performance in this area is less than

~

expected by the supervisor. This does not necessarily mean that the final rating for a
The "LTE" notation is a
performance criterion or the rating of record will be Unacceptible.
that
coaching tool to constructively alert tbe employee that he/she is performing in a manner
...
is less than expected in certain performance criteria. The supervisor
should explain where the
performance is falling short and recommend ways to help the employee bring the performance
up to the expected level. Some methods available to the supervisor
supervision, prioritizing work, on-the-job training,
the Employee Assistance Program.

include: closer
training, mentoring and referral

formal

to

c. For performance in any criterion judged to be "L TE",

the supervisor must provide

narrative to explain this judgement
Additionally,
supervisor shall note the accomplishments

if an employee has performed in a superior manner in any of the criteria,
in the comments section. See Appendix C.

in the comments section of the performance plan.

the

6

May 15, 1996

'FEMA Manual

3700.2

d. The employee's

Individual Development Plan (IDP) should be reviewed and updated

consistent with the understandings communicated during the quarterly reviews.

If attempts to remedy LTE-performance

2-4. Correcting Unacceptable Performance:
one of the critical criteria have not been successful, and if performance is continuing in such a
way as to indicate that the employee's
improves significantly, a Performance Improvement Plan (pIP) shalI be issued. Also, a PIP
may be issued if performance is determined to be Unacceptable in any of the other
performance criteria. The PIP gives the employee an opportunity to improve his/her
performance to an acceptable level. A PIP is a written communication from the supervisor
is deficient
the employee in which the supervisor defines where the employee's performance

final rating is going to be Unacceptable unless it

in any

to

and what specific remedial actions are required to raise performance to a .proficient

level.

a. Before placing an employee on a PIP,

the supervisor must consult with OHRM about

the nature and duration of the PIP. Some remedial actions could require an extended period of
time (for example, scheduling and completing specialized training). A PIP, however, must be
.in place for a minimum period of 60 days.

b. Upon completion of the PIP,

the employee's performance

is assessed, and a rating of

record is issued by the supervisor.
Unacceptable is given, one of the following actions 'is required:
grade, or removal. Such action will be initiated within 30 days from issuance of the rating of
record. Where appropriate, determinations of Acceptable Level of Competence (ALOe)
within-grade increases will be delayed to alIow.for completion of the PIP.

If; after completion of a PIP, a rating 'of record of

reassignment,

reduction-in 

for

2'-5. Annual Ratin~ of Record:

a. Ratings of record shall be given any time within 30 days following completion of the

fourth quarter. The supervisor must determine a final rating for each criterion. The final
rating will be either Unacceptable, Proficient, or Superior. Ra~ings of record will be
documented on the Employee Performance Plan, and may include a narrative summary of the
employee 1s overall performance arid accomplishments
Superior and Unacceptable require written justification and the second-level
approval.

the year. All ratings of

supervisor's

throughout

.

b. Employees shall receive a copy of their rating of record within two weeks of final
supervisory approval. Employees will certify receipt of this rating. By signing the rating,
employees are not necessarily agreeing with the rating, but are merely acknowledging receipt.

c. A rating of record shall not be discussed with an employee until after it has been

approved at the appropriate supervisory level.

d. The final overall Rating of Record is determined to be Proficient unless one of the

7

FEMA Manual 3700.2

following applies:

May 15, 1996

(1) A Superior rating is earned only when the following requirements

are met:

(A) Employee receives a final rating of Supedor

in each of the critical

performance criteria; AND

(B) Employee receives a final rating of Supedor

in 80% or more of all

.

performance criteria combined, and no [mal ratings below Proficient.

Example 1:
of the criteria,
receives a Superior rating of record.

If an employee has 10 performance cdteria, and he/she receives Superior

in eight

including those that are critical, and Proficient

in two,

then that employee

Example 2:
the criteria,
employee receives a Proficient

If an employee has 18 performance criteria, and he/she receives Superior
including those that are critical, and Proficient

in the remaining four,

then that

in 14 of

rating of record (14/18 == 77.8 %).

A written justification must be provided to support a Superior
accomplishments
employee's

benefitted Agency programs.

significant

rating,

indicating

how the

(2) An Unacceptable rating of record will be given when the final rating on anyone or

more critical performance criteria is Unacceptable. An employee may be rated Unacceptable
only with the prior concurrence of the second-level supervisor.
requires corrective action.

Unacceptable performance

Impact of Ratings: An employee must receive a rating of record of Proficient or higher

2-6.
to be eligible to receive within-grade increases, promotions, or performance
Unacceptable performance requires the denial of the within-grade increase and other remedial
action, as described in paragraph 2-4.

recognition.

2-7. Evaluation of Emplovees on Details and Temporary Promotions: An employee on detail
or temporary promotion for a period that.is reasonably expected to last more than 90 days
shall be put on a performance plan and shall receive a quarterly review on his/her performance
by the supervisor under which the detail was served. This review represents at least one
quarter of the individual's annual review, and it shall be recorded on a performance plan
document. The employee's primary supervisor shall give proportionate
determining the employee's
on details of less than 90 days or other ad hoc assignments which take them away from their
regular duties (such as disaster assignments), proper consideration must be given to adjusting
regular work expectations, and supervisors must give appropriate weight
to these assignments
when evaluating performance.

final rating for 'each performance cdterion. When employees are

credit

to this review in

8

Hay 15. 1996

FEMA Hanual 3700.2

2-8. Employee Assessment of Supervisor: This process provides employees an opportunity to
provide feedback about their supervisor
participation is not mandatory, all employees are encouraged to participate in the process by
completing the Employee Assessment of Supervisor

for developmental purposes. Although employee

form. See Appendix D.

a. Second-level supervisors are encouraged to create an "open door"-

type environment
the year. However,
where employees have the ability to submit assessment forms throug~out
In May, second, 
there will be one formal effort to collect
the assessment forms each year.
level supervisors will distribute the Employee Assessment of Supervisor
forms to all staff of
first-level supervisors. The two-part form will be completed anonymously by each employee
and returned in its entirety in a sealed envelope to the second-level supervisor.

b. The second-level

supervisor will separate the two copies of the form, retaining the top

copy and written comments. He/She will forward the bottom copy to the organizational.
personnel
form .. The personnel
single package to OHRM. The data from these forms will be used to assess organizational
needs Agency-wide.

liaison. The first-level supervisor's name does not appear on the· bottom copy of the
liaison will collect the bottom copies of the form and forward them in a

..

c. The second-level

supervisor will review the assessments, which contain employee
feedback regarding their supervisor's performance. Original assessments and any attached
comments will not be shared directly with the first-level supervisor. Rather,
supervisor shall write a summary capturing the results of the employee assessments,
provide a copy of that summary to the fIrst-level supervisor.
dispose of the top copies and comments so that anonymity is preserved.

the second-level
and will
supervisor will

The second-level

d. The second-level

supervisor has a responsibility to evaluate and consider

the

solicit additional
information provided and, if warranted,
supervisor ,shall discuss the information gathered from the completed forms with the first- level
supervisor. The information may be used to help define areas of development or improvement
and may be used to help determine performance in particular performance criterion. Ratings
of the first-level supervisor by the second-level
knowledge of the individual's performance.
information that cannot be verified.

supervisor will be based upon his/her
In no instance shall a rating be based on any

information. The second-level

If an employee disagrees with his/her

2-9. Appeal of Performance Rating- of Record:
assigned rating of record, and/or believes that EPS requirements were not followed,
the
employee may grieve the rating. Negotiated grievance procedures will be utilized where
the FEMA Administrative Grievance
applicable for bargaining unit members. Otherwise,
System (FEMA Manual 3300.1) will be followed for appealing a performance rating. Where
the rating of record is Unacceptable,
supervisor. Where the rating of re~ord is Proficient,
level supervisor.

the grievance shall be filed with the second-level

the grievance shall be filed with the first 

9

1. CRITICAL - JOB KNOWLEDGE

FIRST LEVEL SUPERVISOR'S

SECOND LEVEL SUPER VISOR'S SIGNATURE (Required Ollly if rating of record is superior or unacceptoble)

I HA VB RECEIVED MY PERFORMANCE

the level of teclmical competence

CRITERIA -ALL EMPLOYEES

Supervisor'sinitials and date for each Quarterly Review

(Standard)

- Demonstrates

PERFORMANCE

SIGNATURE

RATING OF RECORD (Check One)

EMPLOYEEPERFO~IANCEPLAN

Projected Date for Quarterly Review:

signature.and

date)

E/l.1PLOY"..E'S SIGNATURE

EMPLOYEE NAME

FIRST LEVEL SUPER VISOR (Type and sign your name and date)

Ctt. "'1 .'7

samp},

THIS SECTION TO BE COMPLETED AT THE BEGINNING OF THE RATING PERIOD

r.....-.-'-'r-" .JDATE
-...............
.....,
)
D
Final
RATING PERIOD
1 ......0.:..UNACCEI'TABLE
TO:
~
•
ORGANIZATION
SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER
FROM:
SERIES AND GRADE
4th Qtr
3rd Qtr
2nd Qtr
1st . Qtr
• SUPERIOR
.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENTAGENCY
R.~ting:
~<mE~
~
customers.
in a respectful maImer. Works
canying out daily fW1ctions. Treats coworkers
toward coworkers while
organizational goals. Displays courtesy and consideration
staff updated on status of activities.
Demonstrates
to accept new tasks. Accomplishes work in a timely fashion.
assigned tasks in support of organizational goals and objectives. Demoilstrates
a willingness
initiative.
skills.
teclmical and interpersonal
for developing work-related
cost-effective methods
training opportu.nities, but also infonnal,
pursuing not only fonnal
cooperatively to resolve miswlderstandings.
efficiency and effectiveness.
issues, gathers facts, develops and weighs
ideas expressed by others.
writing. Listens to and considers
them. Analyzes situations, detennines
and courtesy in meeting the needs of the Agency's and work wlit's intemal and external
necessary to perfonn the duties of the posi tion. Demonstrates
and how they relate to the
employee's work u.nit and assignments.
an lll1derstanding of the
applicable primary missions of FEMA organizations
feedback on work products. Keeps supervisor and appropriate
Solicits and considers
to enhance program
Suggests new approaches
operations and Agency programs.
logic; well-reasoned,
attentive to detail, complies with established policies and
as appropriate.
conclusions or makes reconmlendations
and arrivesat
alternatives,
procedures, and fulfills defined goals.
responsibility
TASKS - Asswnes
for completing
2. CRITICAL - COMPLETING
in accomplishing
9. TEAM WORK - Cooperates with and assists co-workers
- Shares infonnation with coworkers and appropriate offices.
8. COORDINATION
5. PROBLEM SOLVING - Anticipates
and identifies problems and works to resolve
reliability,
responsiveness,
SERVICE - Demonstrates
4. CRITICAL - CUSTOMER
3. CRITICAL - QUALITY OF WORK - Produces work that is thorough, based in
initiative in identifying aIld
- Displays
DEVELOP.MENT
10. PROFESSIONAL
ideas clearly and concisely both orally and in
- Articulates
6. COMMlTh"ICATION
THIS SECTION TO BE COl\,U'LETED AT THE END OF THE R6..TING PERIOD
- Works toward improving work unit
7. IMPROVING WORK PROCESSES
Employee'sinitials and date for each Quarterly Review

~COPV

PLAN AND DISCUSSED IT Willi MY SUPERVISOR (Employee

P, U or S

TInE.

APPENDIX A

FEMA Manual 3700.2

SECOND LEVEL SUPERVISOR (Type and signyour

perfonnance criterion
Identify On Target (OT) or Less Than Expected (LTE) foreach

name and date)

DATE
DATE

May 15, 1996

FE1'vIA FOI'IIl 30-60, JUL 96

(Par'! 1 of3)

(See instructions on reverse)

May 15. 1996

A - DEFINITIONS:

i FEMA Manual

3700.2

INSTRUCTIONS

PROFICIENT:

Performance

in which the employee consistently perfonns

in an acceptable manner.

UNACCEPTABLE: A rating where the employee h~ failed to perform at a proficient
criteria.

level in one or more critical performance

SUPERIOR: Performance in which the employee consistently demonStrates unusual
and consistently performs in a manner which is significantly beyond what is expected by the supervisor. This rating represents a
level of performance of such unusually high quality, that
performing under similar conditions.

it would noimally occur among a small percentage of employees .

initiative inperfonningjob

responsibilities

ON TARGET (On:

Performance in a particular criterion is at least acceptable and the employee's progress is on target;

LESS THAN EXPECTED (LTE): Performance in a particular criterion. which is less than expected by the supervisor. This
does not necessarily mean that the :final rating of record will be Unacceptable.

B - PROCEDURES:

1.

2.

3.

4..

5.

6.

7.

• 8.

Supervisor discusses performance plan with employee. Employee acknowledges
in the appropriate section, and copy is given to employee. Supervisor keeps original

three-part plan.

receipt ofperfonnance

plan by signing

During the quarterly reviews,
on each
criterion to be either On Target (01) or Less Than Expected(L TE), and will note this in the appropriate
column on the plan.

the immediate supervisor will determine

progress of performance

If performance
judgement
manner
.

in any criterion is judge~ to be LTE, the supervisor will provide written narrative to explain this

in the comments section of the performance plan. Additionally,

if any employee has performed in a sUperior

in ~y criterion,

the supervisor shall note accomplishments

..

in the comments section .

.

Both supervisor and employee will initial and date the employee performance plan in the appropriate
section upon concluding the quarterly review.

At the end of the rating period,
. either Proficient. Unacceptable, or Superior.

the supervisor will note the final rating- for each criterion in the appropriate column as

The overall annual Rating of Record is determined to be Proficient unless one of the following applies:

(1)

A Superior rating is earned only when the following requirements

are met:

(A)

(B)

Employee receives a final rating of Superior in each of the critical performance
criteria; AND
Employee receives a final rating of Superior in 80% or more of all performance
criteria combined, and no final ratings below Proficient.

(2)

An Unacceptable
critical performance

criteria is Unacceptable.

rating of record will be given when the final rating on anyone or more

Supervisor will check the appropriate box corresponding to the annual rating of record earned by the
employee.

All ratings of record of Superior aDd Unacceptable
supervisor's approval. Rating shall not be discussed with employee until after appropriate

require written justification and the second level

approval.

14. CRITICAL - EQUAL OPPORTUNITY

NOTE:

SUPPLEMENTAL PERFORMANCE PLAN FOR-

15. PROGRAM MANAGEMENT

pJ'ojectcd Date for Qu:u·tcl"ly Review:

TIle Supplemental Perfonnance Plan,

- Provides equal opportunity for all

Supervisor's initials and date for each Quarterly Review

. ~AIVIPl

11. CRITICAL

- STAFF COMMUl'i'ICA TIONS

- Provides clear direction,

1st Qtr

PERFORMANCE

CRITERIA

-

in addition to part I of the plan, shall be given to individuals whose positions

- Effectively translates Agency goals and

-

.- .- .•.•.,,
vJ-\IVIr-LC
(OT) or Less Than E;>.:pected(LTE) for each
IdentifY On Target
ORGANIZATION
TITLE,SERIESANDGRADE
\."u r- T
Final
Py
~
~
TO:
Rating:
E CO
2nd Qtr
3rd Qtr
FROM:
4th Qtr
(Sta/ldard)
-
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY RATING PERIOD:
~1
.•..•." nn •.•.•••.
.
conilllunication.
SUPERVISORS / MANAGERS
performance criterion.
Plans. Divides time and focus equitably between program and persOlmel
conununicates Agency and organizational goals. Fosters an environment of open
to reduce
Operates within budgetary limitations and actively explores altematives
-
impact of program and persolmel management decisions.
financial
Considers
extemal customers and are accomplished wiUlin established time-frames.
rewards and recognition and perfonnance management
safety, and health
systems. Meets at least
steps to address the problem of poor perfonllunce.
appropriate
Takes
perfonllers.
and provides positive feedback to good
on a regular basis. Recognizes achievements
Individual Development Plans (IDPs). hlStruCtS, coaches, counsels, and mentors staff
professional and teclmical development of staff. Works wiUl staff to develop
program.
ofthe Agency's occupational,
management. Meets requirements
quarterly with individlJaI staff. Works with stafTto develop and update Performance
staff in program plmming, problem solving, and decision-making.
sufficient
needs. Delegates
technical strengths and developmental
individual's
staff consistent WiUl
assiglilllents. Assigns work unit activities to individual
improve program and cost effectiveness.
creative ways to carry out FEMA's mission and to accomplish work wlit
protected in accordance with Agency policies and procedures.
costs. Ensures Umt personal and real property is utilized, accowlted for, and
assiglUllents are driven by the expressed needs of the work unit's intemal and
into work unit activities. Ensures that work unit
organizational priorities
feedback to staff. Regularly keeps staff infonned of
and constructive
expectations,
carry out supervisory/managerial
TIle Rating of Record and signatures will be on part 1 of the plan.
for co-workers.
respect
environment which encourages
Fosters an
regard to race, color, religion, national origin, gender, age, or disability.
regarding employment and working conditions wiUl0ut
employees and applicants
responsibilities.
Involves
staff to effectively execute their work unit activities.
auUlOrity to empower
Actively explores innovative ways to stremnline procedures and
responsibilities.
and work issues that concem them. Clearly
organizational
administrative,
require them to
persOIillel management policies. Ensures proper and ong~ing use of the Agency's
the
- Supports and encourages
13. CRITICAL - STAFF DEVELOPMENT
- Supports and applies FEMA
12. CRITICAL - STAFF MANAGEMENT
staff to accomplish work unit
OF WORK - Utilizes
16. DELEGATION
EMPLOYEENAME
resources effectively.
- Manages financial
17. RESOURCE MANAGElVIENT
to develop
- Encourages employees
18. CREATMTY
Employee's initials and dale for each Quarterly Review

SOCIALSECURITYNUMBER

AND INNOVATION

P, U, or S

~

FEI\'!A FOl'I1130-60A, JUL 96

(Part 2 of 3)

; ~EMA Manual

3700.2

APPENDIX

C

M8:Y 15, 1996

FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY
EMPLOYEE PERFORMANCE PLAN COMMENTS

EMPLOYEE'S NAME

FIRST QUARTER COMJv1ENTS:

RATING PERIOD

TO:

ECURITY NUMBER

I ORGANIZATION

EMPLOYEE'S

INITIALS AND DATE

SUPER VISOR'S INITIALS AND DATE

SECOND QUARTER COMMENTS:

EMPLOYEE'S

INITIALS AND DATE

SUPER VISOR'S INITIALS AND DATE

THIRD QUARTER COMMENTS:

~.

EMPLOYEE'S

INITIALS AND DATE

FOURTH QUARTER COMMENTS:

SUPERVISOR'S

INITIALS AND DATE

EMPLOYEE'S

INITIALS AND DATE

SUPER VISOR'S INITIALS AND DATE

OVERALL END OF YEAR COMMENTS:

EMPLOYEE'S

INITIALS AND DATE

FEMA FornI30-60B,

JUL 96

(Part 3 of3)

(Attach additional

sheets cis necessalY)

.

.'

Issues that concern them ...

individual

employees.

4.

6.

5.

3.

I ~egularly keeps staff lllfonned of admlllistrative,
IEnsures proper and ongoing use of the Agency's rewards aud recogllitioil and
2345678910
1 234567&9to
I Fosters an envirOlilllent which encourages
234.567&910
2345678910
78910
t
and work 1
1
respect
Clearly conuuunicates Agency and organizational goals.
Fosters an environment of open cOlmmmication.
systems - illcluding meeting at least quarterly witil

2.
performalwe management

organizational
for co-woiters.

I
I

their work unjt activities.

and developmental

nussion and to accomplish work unit responsibilities

management.

employees ...

Takes steps to address

. performers.

needs.

...

the problem of poor performance ..

ORGANIZATION (List only the Directorate

DELEGATION

1~1.

STAFF DEVELOPMENT

OF WORK / CREATIVITY13.

9.

8.

14.

17.

12.

II.

Involves staff ill program planning, problem solving, and decision-making.

15.
10.

78910
I
I Encourages
I Divides time and focus eq~itably between prognnn and persOlUlel
1 234567&910
1 2345678910
2345678910
345678910
1'2 345678910
34567&910
234
67
1 23·4 56·7 8910
2345.67.8910
2345.678910
10' ..
IDelegates
9
I Supports and encourages
I Encourages employees to' develop creative ways to carry out 'FENrA's
IAssigns work unit activities consistent with llldividual's
2
and provides positi ve feedback to good
Recognizes achievements
Instructs, coaches, counsels, and mentors on a regular basis ..
the professional
2.
I Utilizes staff to accomplish work unit assignments.
I Works with employees
sufficient authority to empower employees
v
I
leye~ e.g .• Office of Inspector Genera~ Region I. Mitigation Directorate.)

I
to develop Individual Development Plans (IDPs). I
I - 1
t
and tecImical development of
tecImical strengths
to effectively executeI
I
t
I
1

and supports equal opportmuty in tile workplace.

7.

8

5

FEDERAL EMERGENCY

NIANAGEMENT AGENCY

ASSESS:MENT OF IMlVIEDIATE SUPERVISOR

rnstructions:

TIle ~ormatiou

being collected pertains only to your lllilllediate supervisor.

The completion of this form is vqhmtary and may be

submitted anonymously. Circle the nwnber
assessment). You may.complete

an assessment

that best identifies

how your supervisor mteracts with you (10 = highes~ assessment,

I = lowest'

for each performance

criterion or for the criterion you select. Return the form (all part.<;' of the form

including allY wn"tten comments)

to your second level supervisor

ill a sealed envelope .

. COMMUNICATION

/ STAFF 1.\'IANAGEMENT

Criteria

Assessment

1.'

Provides clear direction, expectations,

aud constructive

feedback.

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

6

,

6

Nh\1E OF SUPER VISOR:

I

FEMA Fol'm 30-60C,

JUL 96

i·.

FEMA MANUAL 255-3-1 
EMPLOYEE DISCIPLINE MANUAL 
APPROVAL DATE: 12/29/2015 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 

FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY 

OFFICE OF THE CHIEF COMPONENT HUMAN CAPITAL OFFICER

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Foreword 

It is the basic policy of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) that 
workplace problems will be dealt with in a fair, constructive, and reasonable manner. All 
FEMA employees, supervisors and managers are expected to demonstrate acceptable 
conduct and performance at all times, as required by the ethical standards of conduct 
and other rules, regulations, and applicable laws. Fairness to those employees who 
maintain acceptable standards of performance and conduct – who conduct themselves 
properly, follow the rules, and abide by the standards – requires that appropriate action 
be taken to deal with employees who exhibit poor performance and acts of misconduct. 

When employees violate rules, regulations, policies and procedures, it is important for 
supervisors and managers to have appropriate procedures to follow. This policy will 
help to ensure that proper discipline is taken in a fair, constructive, and reasonable 
manner.  

For employees in bargaining units covered by negotiated agreements, appropriate 
negotiated agreement provisions relating to subjects in this Manual should also be 
reviewed. For bargaining unit employees, should any of these instructions conflict with a 
provision of a negotiated agreement, the agreement will prevail unless abiding by the 
agreement would be contrary to law, rule, or regulation.  

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 

Foreword ......................................................................................................................... 2 

 GENERAL INFORMATION ...................................................................... 5 

1-1.  Purpose ................................................................................................................ 5 

1-2.  Applicability and Scope ........................................................................................ 5 

1-3.  Supersession ........................................................................................................ 6 

1-4.  Authorities/References ......................................................................................... 6 

1-5.  Policy .................................................................................................................... 7 

1-6.  Definitions ............................................................................................................. 8 

1-7.  Responsibilities ................................................................................................... 11 

1-8.  Forms Prescribed ............................................................................................... 13 

1-9.  Questions ........................................................................................................... 13 

 DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS FOR COMPETITIVE SERVICE EMPLOYEES

 ...................................................................................................................................... 14 

2-1.  Applicability......................................................................................................... 14 

2-2. 

Initiating Disciplinary Actions .............................................................................. 14 

2-3.  Employee Right to Challenge Disciplinary Actions ............................................. 18 

2-4.  Effective Date of the Action ................................................................................ 18 

 DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS FOR EXCEPTED SERVICE EMPLOYEES . 19 

3-1.  Applicability......................................................................................................... 19 

3-2. 

Initiating Disciplinary Actions .............................................................................. 19 

3-3.  Employee Right to Challenge Disciplinary Actions ............................................. 21 

3-4.  Effective Date of the Action ................................................................................ 21 

 ADVERSE ACTIONS ............................................................................. 22 

4-1.  Applicability......................................................................................................... 22 

4-2.  Types of Adverse Actions ................................................................................... 23 

4-3.  Formal Notice ..................................................................................................... 23 

4-4.  Grievance and Appeal Rights ............................................................................. 25 

4-5.  Effective Date of the Action ................................................................................ 26 

4-6.  Furlough Procedures .......................................................................................... 26 

 ADMINISTRATIVE LEAVE .................................................................... 27 

5-1.  Applicability......................................................................................................... 27 

3 

 
 
5-2.  Generally ............................................................................................................ 27 

5-3.  Employees Who Do Not Have a Security Clearance .......................................... 27 

5-4.  Unsuitability Cases ............................................................................................. 28 

5-5.  Security Clearance Cases .................................................................................. 28 

5-6.  Removal Cases .................................................................................................. 28 

5-7.  Supervisory Responsibility and Considerations .................................................. 28 

5-8.  Special Considerations When an Employee is Arrested ..................................... 28 

5-9.  Approval Requirements for Administrative Leave ............................................... 29 

5-10.  Return to Duty .................................................................................................... 29 

 EXPEDITED PROCEDURES ................................................................. 30 

6-1.  Procedural Requirements for Probationary Employees in the Competitive Service

30 

6-2.  Procedural Requirements for Employees in the Career Excepted Service ......... 31 

6-3.  Procedural Requirements for Competitive Service Term Employees ................. 32 

6-4.  Procedures for Federal Coordinating Officers .................................................... 32 

6-5.  Procedural Requirements for Competitive Service Temporary Employees ........ 32 

 ALTERNATIVE DISCIPLINE .................................................................. 33 

7-1.  Alternative Discipline .......................................................................................... 33 

7-2.  Criteria for Using Alternative Discipline .............................................................. 33 

7-3.  Procedures for Effecting Alternative Discipline ................................................... 34 

7-4.  Types of Alternative Discipline............................................................................ 34 

7-5.  Maintenance of an Agreement............................................................................ 34 

 PROCEDURES FOR NEGATIVE SUITABILITY AND FITNESS 

DETERMINATIONS ...................................................................................................... 35 

8-1.  Unsuitability or Unfitness Actions ....................................................................... 35 

4 

 
 
  
1-1.  Purpose 

GENERAL INFORMATION 

This Manual prescribes the policy, procedures, and responsibilities for taking 
conduct-related discipline against employees, which will promote the effective 
and efficient operation of FEMA. The public interest requires the maintenance of 
high standards of employee integrity, conduct, effectiveness, and service to the 
public. When such standards are not met, it is essential that prompt corrective 
action be taken. FEMA’s policy is to maintain standards of conduct and efficiency 
that will positively promote the best interests of the Federal Government, FEMA, 
and the public it serves.  

The primary focus of this Manual is to guide supervisors on the procedures to 
correct misconduct. When employees commit misconduct, supervisors shall 
consider the range of applicable discipline available in accordance with the 
procedures in this Manual. These procedures also address furloughs for less 
than 30 continuous calendar days or 22 discontinuous workdays, which are 
effected for management reasons, and are not driven by employee misconduct 
or performance problems. 

1-2.  Applicability and Scope 

The primary focus of this Manual is disciplinary and adverse actions, including 
reprimands, suspensions without pay, demotions, furloughs of less than 30 
continuous calendar days or 22 discontinuous workdays, and removals. This 
Manual applies to all permanent FEMA employees hired under the authorities in 
Title 5, U.S. Code whether in FEMA Headquarters, Regions, or Field 
organizational establishments. 

Allegations of misconduct committed by FEMA employees must be addressed 
expeditiously. All employees are responsible for reporting allegations of 
misconduct in accordance with the Administrative Investigations Directive, FD 
123-19, which should be consulted for complete guidance. For example, certain 
allegations must be reported to the Department of Homeland Security, Office of 
the Inspector General (DHS/OIG) in accordance with DHS MD 0810.1. 

Often misconduct may constitute the basis for discipline and may also be 
conduct that constitutes unacceptable performance under the employee’s 
performance standards. The procedures for each differ, but are not mutually 
exclusive. The supervisor shall consult with OCCHCO/Labor and Employee 
Relations to determine whether misconduct procedures (under this manual) or 
performance procedures apply, or both. 

The policies and procedures of this Manual will apply to all disciplinary actions 
initiated on or after the effective date of this Manual. 

Excluded from the provisions of this Manual are:  

A.  Procedures for addressing poor performance by non-SES employees hired 

5 

 
 
under Title 5, United States Code, and Cadre of On-Call Response 
Employees (CORE) hired under Section 306 of the Robert T. Stafford 
Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act, Pub. Law 93-288, as 
amended (Stafford Act), 42 U.S.C. § 5149(b), which are covered in FEMA 
Manual (FM) 255-1-1, Employee Performance Management Program;  

B.  Procedures for addressing poor performance by Senior Executive Service 
(SES) members, which are covered by DHS Management Directive 3180;  

C.  Procedures for addressing poor performance by wage-grade employees, 
which are covered by FM 3700.2, Employee Performance System;   

D.  Employees hired under the Stafford Act (see FEMA Manual 252-11-1 Cadre 
of On-Call Response/Recovery Employee (CORE) Program; FD 010-7 
(IMAT-Directive); and FD 010-6 FEMA Reservist Program); and 

E.  Employees who are appointed by the President with Senate confirmation, 
career and non-career SES members, and other presidentially appointed 
employees. Employees whose positions are determined to be of a 
confidential, policy-determining, policy-making, or policy-advocating character 
by that is excepted from the competitive service by the President, the Office 
of Personnel Management (Schedule C), the head of DHS, or by statute are 
also excluded from the provisions of this Manual. 

Employees covered by collective bargaining agreements may be subject to 
additional procedures which supplement or supplant those described in this 
policy.   

1-3.  Supersession 

This manual supersedes FEMA Manual 3310.1, Disciplinary and Adverse Action 
Procedures, dated September 16, 1981.  

1-4.  Authorities/References 

A.  Title 5, United States Code (U.S.C.), Chapter 75, Adverse Actions.  

B.  Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.), Part 735, Employee 

Responsibilities and Conduct. 

C.  Title 5, C.F.R., Part 213, Excepted Service. 

D.  Title 5, C.F.R., Part 315, Career and Career-Conditional Employment. 

E.  Title 5, C.F.R., Part 316, Temporary and Term Employment. 

F.  Title 5, C.F.R., Part 731, Suitability. 

G.  Title 5, C.F.R., Part 752, Adverse Actions. 

H.  DHS Management Directive (MD) 0810.1, The Office of the Inspector 

General, dated June 10, 2004. 

6 

 
 
 
I.  DHS Instruction Handbook 121-01-007, The Department of Homeland 
Security Personnel Suitability and Security Program, dated June 2015. 

J.  FEMA Directive (FD) 123-19, FEMA Administrative Investigations Policy, 

dated April 3, 2012. 

K.  FEMA Instruction 1100.1, Standards of Conduct, dated April 27, 1993. 

L.  FEMA Manual 106-1-1, Scheduling of Work, dated March 5, 2014. 

M.  FEMA Manual 123-10-1, Absence and Leave, December 29, 2015. 

N.  FEMA Manual 123-19-1, Administrative Investigations Policy, dated April 5, 

2012. 

O.  FEMA Manual 123-20-1, Drug-Free Workplace Program, dated July 28, 2014. 

P.  FEMA Manual 256-3-1, Administrative Grievance System, dated September 

12, 2014. 

1-5.  Policy 

A.  It is the policy of FEMA that disciplinary and adverse actions are to be 

effected in accordance with the policies and procedures set forth herein and 
in applicable laws and regulations. 

1.  Discipline or adverse actions may not be taken against an employee for 

any reason prohibited by 5 U.S.C. § 2302, to include politically motivated 
coercion; nepotism; or unduly influencing the competitive process; 
retaliation for exercising the employee’s legal rights, for providing truthful 
testimony; or in retaliation for an employee’s disclosure of what he or she 
reasonably believes to be a public safety risk, gross mismanagement, 
abuse of authority, a gross waste of funds, or a violation of any law, rule, 
or regulation; and   

2.  Discipline or adverse actions may not be based on discrimination because 

of age, sex, race, religion, color, national origin, disability, genetic 
information, sexual orientation, or veteran status.  

B.  Supervisors must first consult with the Labor and Employee Relations Branch, 
of the Office of the Chief Component Human Capital Officer (OCCHCO) to 
determine the disciplinary action to take, and shall first consider the least 
severe discipline for the offense, depending on the nature of the offense and 
the surrounding circumstances. The goal is to correct an employee’s 
behavior. The concept of “progressive discipline” is to initiate disciplinary 
action at the lowest level possible in an effort to correct a situation before it 
becomes necessary to impose a harsher penalty. Such measures start with 
reprimands and short suspensions. However, if the first or second offense of 
misconduct is egregious or the violation of rules and regulations is flagrant, a 
severe penalty (i.e., long suspension or removal) may be imposed for that 
offense. In all cases, the manager should choose the level of penalty that will 
be appropriate and effective in preventing the employee from repeating the 

7 

 
 
misconduct, while considering the penalties given to other employees for 
similar misconduct in similar circumstances. 

C.  The nature of an employee’s appointment and length of service dictate the 
procedures to follow when considering imposition of disciplinary or adverse 
actions. The types of appointments applicable to each chapter will be 
identified at the beginning of each chapter. 

D.  Allegations of misconduct or poor performance, and any resulting disciplinary, 
adverse, or performance actions, shall only be discussed with those FEMA 
officials with a need to know in order to perform their duties. This policy is 
designed to protect employee privacy. This policy also protects FEMA, 
supervisors, and managers from allegations of discrimination, retaliation, or 
misconduct. 

1-6.  Definitions 

A.  Administrative Leave. An administratively authorized absence from duty 

without a loss of pay or charge to leave. 

B.  Adverse Action. A removal, suspension for 15 days or more (including an 
indefinite suspension), or demotion issued to an employee to correct 
misconduct or other offenses and to enforce prescribed rules of behavior. A 
furlough for less than 30 continuous calendar days or 22 discontinuous 
workdays is considered an adverse action, but is not done for disciplinary 
reasons. 

C.  Constructive Notice. When an employee is deemed to have notice of an 
action even though actual notice was not personally delivered to the 
employee. 

D.  Day. A calendar day, except when otherwise specified. 

E.  Deciding Official. The deciding official may be an employee outside of the 
supervisor chain of command, but must be properly appointed in writing by 
the Chief Component Human Capital Officer (CCHCO) or designee. (1) For 
disciplinary actions, the management official responsible for making a 
decision, who may also be the proposing official. (2) For adverse actions, the 
management official, who is at a higher level than the supervisor or the 
management official responsible for the action proposed and who was not 
involved in making or influencing a decision directly related to the action being 
proposed. (3) Note: If the Administrator is the employee’s first or second-level 
supervisor, he or she may delegate the deciding official responsibilities to 
another management official. He or she may also act as the proposing and 
deciding official in such cases. 

F.  Demotion. A change to lower grade or a decrease in pay for disciplinary 

reasons. 

G.  Disciplinary Action. A reprimand or suspension of 14 days or less issued to an 

employee to correct misconduct.  

8 

 
 
H.  Douglas Factors. The criteria supervisors must consider in determining an 
appropriate penalty to impose for an act of employee misconduct. The 
Douglas Factors are: 

1.  The nature and seriousness of the offense, and its relation to the 

employee’s duties, position, and responsibilities, including whether the 
offense was intentional or technical or inadvertent, or was committed 
maliciously or for gain, or was frequently repeated; 

2.  The employee’s job level and type of employment, including supervisory 
or fiduciary role, contacts with the public, and prominence of the position; 

3.  The employee’s past disciplinary record; 

4.  The employee’s past work record, including length of service, performance 

on the job, ability to get along with fellow workers, and dependability; 

5.  The effect of the offense upon the employee’s ability to perform at a 
satisfactory level and its effect upon supervisors’ confidence in the 
employee’s ability to perform assigned duties; 

6.  Consistency of the penalty with those imposed upon other employees for 

the same or similar offenses; 

7.  Consistency of the penalty with any applicable agency table of penalties; 

8.  The notoriety of the offense or its impact upon the reputation of the 

agency; 

9.  The clarity with which the employee was on notice of any rules that were 

violated in committing the offense, or had been warned about the conduct 
in question; 

10. Potential for the employee’s rehabilitation; 

11. Mitigating circumstances surrounding the offense such as unusual job 

tensions, personality problems, mental impairment, harassment, or bad 
faith, malice or provocation on the part of others involved in the matter; 
and 

12. The adequacy and effectiveness of alternative sanctions to deter such 

conduct in the future by the employee or others. 

Not all of these factors will be pertinent in every case. Deciding officials must 
balance and weigh the relevant factors in an individual case. 

I.  Furlough. The placing of an employee in a temporary status without duties 
and pay because of lack of work, funds, or other non-disciplinary reasons. 
The procedures to place employee on furlough are in Chapter 4 (adverse 
actions). 

J.  Indefinite Suspensions Without Pay. A temporary involuntary, non-duty, non-
pay status imposed due to a pending investigation, inquiry, or further agency 
action. Examples of reasons for indefinite suspensions include, suspension or 
revocation of an employee’s security clearance, or if there is a reasonable 

9 

 
belief that the employee committed a crime for which a sentence of 
imprisonment could be imposed. 

K.  Misconduct. Violation by a FEMA employee of any Federal, state, or local 

law; DHS or FEMA regulation or policy; or any other applicable standard of 
conduct. Misconduct applies not only to on-the-job conduct, but also applies 
to conduct during non-duty hours that may adversely affect FEMA personnel, 
programs, and operations. 

L.  Office or Directorate. Offices or Directorates that are at or above Level three 

in FEMA’s organizational structure: Office of the Administrator, Office of Chief 
Counsel, Office of the Chief Financial Officer, Office of External Affairs, Office 
of Policy and Program Analysis, Office of Response and Recovery, Response 
Directorate, Recovery Directorate, Logistics Management Directorate, 
Protection and National Preparedness, National Preparedness Directorate, 
National Continuity Programs Directorate, Grant Program Directorate, Mission 
Support, Office of the Chief Administrative Officer, Office of the Chief 
Component Human Capital Officer, Office of the Chief Information Officer, 
Office of the Chief Procurement Officer, Office of the Chief Security Officer, 
Federal Insurance and Mitigation Administration, Federal Insurance 
Administration (FIA) Mitigation, FIA Insurance, United States Fire 
Administration, and Offices of Regional Administrators. 

M.  Probationary Period. The first year of Federal service of an employee who is 
given a career or career-conditional appointment in the competitive service. 
An employee who is promoted, demoted, or reassigned before completing a 
probationary period is required to complete a probationary period in the new 
position (see 5 C.F.R. § 315.801). 

N.  Proposing Official. The supervisor or manager who initiates an adverse 

action, or a suspension without pay for 14 days or less. In most cases, the 
proposing official should be a lower level supervisor within the employee’s 
chain of command, but does not have to be the immediate supervisor. The 
proposing official may be an employee outside of the supervisory chain of 
command but, if so, must be properly appointed in writing by the Chief 
Component Human Capital Officer (CCHCO) or designee. In disciplinary 
actions, the proposing official and the deciding official may be the same 
person. 

O.  Removal. An involuntary separation of an employee from the Agency.  

P.  Reprimand. A written statement of censure given to an employee for minor 
misconduct, which may be placed in the employee’s official personnel file.  

Q.  Supervisor. An employee with the delegated authority to discipline and 

remove an employee from Federal service in accordance with the procedures 
found in this Manual. 

R.  Suspension. The placing of an employee in an involuntary, non-duty, non-pay 
status for disciplinary reasons. Suspensions may be “indefinite” when the 

10 

 
Agency is conducting an investigation or inquiry and in other appropriate 
circumstances. 

S.  Temporary Employee. An employee hired to a short-term position, in the 

competitive service, that is not expected to last longer than one year (see 5 
C.F.R. Part 316, Subpart D). 

T.  Term Employee. An employee hired to a non-permanent position, in the 

competitive service, for more than one year, but less than four years (see 5 
C.F.R. Part 316, Subpart C). 

U.  Trial Period. A period of service, usually one or two years, before certain 

categories of employees, such as most excepted service employees, obtain a 
vested interest in their employment. 

1-7.  Responsibilities 

A.  The FEMA Administrator is responsible for: 

1.  Approving and maintaining an effective employee relations program policy 

throughout the agency;  

2.  Monitoring compliance with the rules and regulations associated with 

disciplinary and adverse actions; and 

3.  Providing policy direction on the implementation of FEMA’s disciplinary 

and adverse action procedures.  

B.  Office of Chief Counsel (OCC) is responsible for: 

1.  Providing appropriate legal counsel, guidance, and support for all 

disciplinary and adverse actions in accordance with FD 112-5; and   

2.  Representing the agency in litigation before the Equal Employment 

Opportunity Commission, the Merit Systems Protection Board, the Federal 
Labor Relations Authority, and other administrative bodies, and for 
providing litigation support to the Department of Justice for litigation in the 
Federal courts. 

C.  Office of the Chief Component Human Capital Officer (OCCHCO) is 

responsible for: 

1.  Assisting supervisors and management officials at all levels with  matters 

concerning discipline; and recommending sound human resources 
management strategies in accordance with applicable statutes, 
regulations, and policy; 

2.  Determining whether the proposing or deciding official should be an 

employee outside of the supervisory chain. In such circumstances, the 
Chief Component Human Capital Officer (CCHCO), or designee, will 
appoint such officials in writing; 

3.  Advising proposing and deciding officials on employee misconduct issues 

and assisting in drafting documents concerning discipline; 

11 

 
 
4.  Drafting disciplinary and adverse action letters (i.e., official reprimands, 
suspensions of less than 14 days, suspensions of 15 days or more, 
demotions, and removals);  

5.  Reviewing existing policies and procedures regarding discipline and 

recommending appropriate changes; 

6.  Responding to employee questions regarding their rights in matters 

concerning discipline;  

7.  Ensuring documents concerning discipline are uploaded into employee 

Official Personnel Files, as appropriate; and  

8.  Establishing and maintaining an effective employee relations program 

throughout the Agency.  

D.  Office of the Chief Security Officer (OCSO) is responsible for determining an 
employee’s suitability or fitness for Federal service, eligibility for access to 
classified information, and/or eligibility to hold a national security position. 

E.  Office and Directorate heads are responsible for: 

1.  Administering policy concerning discipline in conformance with the 
requirements of this Manual and any applicable labor-management 
agreements; and reviewing existing policies and recommending 
appropriate changes;  

2.  Ensuring that appropriate mechanisms are in place to inform employees of 

FEMA policy concerning discipline; 

3.  Ensuring that supervisors properly exercise their disciplinary authority; and  

4.  Delegating to supervisors appropriate authority for the direction and 
discipline of employees under their jurisdiction and ensuring proper 
supervisory training. 

F.  Supervisors are responsible for: 

1.  Reporting allegations of misconduct in accordance with the procedures in 

FD 123-19; 

2.  Consulting with OCCHCO/Labor and Employee Relations prior to initiating 

discipline for misconduct; 

3.  Initiating appropriate and timely discipline; 

4.  If assigned to do so, gathering, analyzing, and documenting the facts 

concerning an allegation of misconduct;  

5.  Delivering official reprimands and notices of disciplinary and adverse 

actions to employees; 

6.  Delivering signed and dated official reprimands, final decisions of 
disciplinary and adverse actions, and other supporting documents 
effecting discipline to the servicing ER Specialist;  

12 

 
7.  Delivering signed and dated official reprimands, final decisions of 
disciplinary and adverse actions, and other supporting documents 
(including Standard Form (SF-52)) effecting discipline to the servicing ER 
Specialist; and 

8.  Treating employees under their supervision in a fair and equitable manner. 

G.  Employees are responsible for: 

1.  Reporting allegations of misconduct in accordance with the procedures in 

FD 123-19; 

2.  Acting in a manner that will ensure their conduct does not negatively 
reflect on the Federal Government and the Federal Emergency 
Management Agency (FEMA); 

3.  Reporting for work on time and in a condition which will permit 

performance of assigned duties; 

4.  Performing work according to FEMA’s schedule of work and absence and 

leave policies; 

5.  Responding promptly to directions and instructions received from the 

supervisor; 

6.  Serving as a proposing official or deciding official if appointed for 

disciplinary or adverse actions; 

7.  Exercising courtesy and professionalism in dealing with fellow workers, 

supervisors, and the public; 

8.  Observing pertinent laws, rules, regulations, and other authoritative 

instructions; and 

9.  Upholding, with integrity, the public trust involved in the position to which 

assigned.  

1-8.  Forms Prescribed 

None. 

1-9.  Questions 

Questions concerning FEMA’s Discipline Program should be directed to the 
Office of the Chief Component Human Capital Officer at (202) 212-3962. For 
advice or guidance regarding specific cases of discipline, contact OCCHCO 
Labor and Employee Relations or the assigned ER Specialist for your Office or 
Directorate for assistance. 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS FOR COMPETITIVE SERVICE 

EMPLOYEES 

2-1.  Applicability 

A.  The policies and procedures of this Chapter apply to the following employees: 

1.  An employee in the competitive service who has completed a probationary 

or trial period; 

2.  An employee in the competitive service serving in an appointment which 
requires no probationary or trial period, and who has completed one year 
of current continuous employment in the same or similar positions under 
other than a temporary appointment limited to one year or less; 

3.  An employee with competitive status who occupies a position under 

schedule B of 5 C.F.R. Part 213; and 

4.  An employee who was in the competitive service at the time his or her 

position was first listed under Schedule A, B, or C of the excepted service 
and still occupies that position. 

B.  The policies and procedures of this Chapter do not apply to the following 

instances or employees: 

1.  Suspensions for 14 days or less taken for national security reasons under 

5 U.S.C. § 7532;  

2.  Suspensions for 14 days or less taken under any other provision of law 
which excepts the action from title 5 U.S.C. chapter 75, subchapter I; or 

3.  Reemployed annuitants. 

2-2. 

Initiating Disciplinary Actions 

Disciplinary Actions include official reprimands and suspensions of 14 days or 
less. An official reprimand is the lowest form of discipline. Supervisors must 
provide all documentation related to the alleged offense to the ER Specialist for 
review. The ER Specialist will draft the recommended action for review and 
signature by the supervisor. 

A.  Official Reprimand. This is a memorandum issued by a supervisor (or 
manager in the supervisory chain) and addressed to the employee.  

1.  The memorandum will include the following information: 

i.  Cite, specifically and in detail, the facts that support the reprimand, 

including rules or regulations violated. There must be sufficient detail to 
give the employee or an individual unacquainted with the situation a 
clear understanding of the reason so that the employee can grieve or 
prepare a reply; 

ii.  State the date and type of previous discipline, if any, relied upon to 

support the action; 

14 

 
 
iii.  State that the Employee Assistance Program (EAP) is available for 

assistance and include the phone number, if appropriate; 

iv.  Advise the employee of the potential for negative consequences for 

future misconduct; 

v.  If the supervisor decides to place the official reprimand in the 

employee’s Official Personnel File (OPF), state that a copy of the 
reprimand will be placed in the employee’s OPF for a specified period, 
up to three years, unless there is sufficient cause to remove it sooner; 

vi.  State the name and contact information of the servicing ER Specialist 

who may be contacted for advice and assistance; and 

vii. Provide applicable grievance rights and right to file a complaint with the 

Office of Equal Rights. 

2.  The supervisor shall: 

i.  Deliver the official reprimand to the employee in person in a private 

meeting. If personal delivery at work is not possible, or appropriate, the 
reprimand may be mailed or emailed to the employee. If the reprimand 
is mailed to the employee, the employee will be required to sign for the 
letter to show proof of delivery. The supervisor should ask employee to 
acknowledge receipt of the reprimand by signing and dating the last 
page, where indicated. Acknowledgement of receipt does not imply 
that the employee agrees with the action -- it simply indicates that the 
employee received a copy of the notice. If the employee refuses to 
acknowledge receipt, the supervisor should annotate the last page of 
the notice, stating that the employee refused to sign for it; and  

ii.  Deliver a signed and dated copy (with employee’s signature, if 

available) to the ER Specialist, so that a copy can be placed in the 
employee’s OPF, if applicable. 

B.  Suspensions without pay for 14 days or less. A notice of proposal is required 

prior to imposition of a suspension.  

1.  The proposal notice must: 

i. 

Identify, specifically, the proposed penalty and the reason or charge 
(i.e., notice of proposal to suspend from duty for five calendar days for 
absence without approved leave); 

ii.  Describe, in detail, the facts and relevant information used to support 

the proposed action; 

iii.  Cite the laws, rules, regulations, and/or FEMA policies violated (if 

applicable); 

iv.  Reference prior discipline, if any, used to enhance the proposed 

penalty; and 

v.  Specify the employee’s rights, including: 

15 

 
a.  A specific amount of time (no less than 5 days) to respond orally 
and/or in writing to the proposed action, and a right to submit 
affidavits and other documentary evidence in support of the 
response (if the last day of the response period falls on a weekend 
or Federal holiday, the response will be due the following business 
day); 

b.  A reasonable amount of official time to prepare a reply if the 

employee is working during the proposal period. Normally, four to 
ten hours is granted, depending on the severity of the proposed 
penalty; 

c.  Representation by an attorney or other representative, at the 

employee’s own expense;  

d.  Review of the material relied on to support the proposed penalty; 

e.  A written decision that includes the specific reasons for the final 

decision; and 

f.  Receipt of the decision notice on or before the date the action will 

be effective; 

vi.  State other pertinent information and facts, including analysis of 
relevant “Douglas Factors”, relied upon in proposing the penalty; 

vii. Include the name and contact information of the deciding official (the 
management official who serves as the proposing official may also 
serve as the deciding official); 

viii. Include the name and contact information of the ER Specialist where 

the employee can make arrangements for a personal reply and the fax 
number or email address where the written reply should be sent; 

ix.  Inform the employee that requests for additional time to reply should 

be in writing and addressed to the ER Specialist for consideration. The 
request must identify the amount of time needed along with an 
explanation. The ER Specialist will coordinate requests for additional 
time with the servicing deciding official; 

x.  State the name and contact information of the servicing ER Specialist 
who may be contacted to make arrangements to obtain the material 
relied upon in proposing the action and for advice and assistance; and   

xi.  Be delivered to the employee in person in a private meeting. The 

supervisor should ask the employee to acknowledge receipt of the 
document by placing their signature and date on the last page of the 
notice, where indicated. Acknowledgement of receipt does not imply 
that the employee agrees with the action -- it simply indicates that the 
employee received a copy of the notice. If the employee refuses to 
acknowledge receipt, the supervisor should annotate the last page of 
the notice, stating that the employee refused to sign. If personal 
delivery at work is not possible, the notice may be mailed and/or 

16 

 
emailed to the employee, with a return or read receipt requested to 
show proof of delivery or attempt to deliver. If the notice is mailed to 
the employee, the employee will be required to sign for the letter to 
show proof of delivery. Forward a signed/dated copy (with employee’s 
signature, if available) to the ER Specialist. 

xii. Once a proposal notice is issued, a proposing or deciding official shall 
only discuss the matter with the servicing ER Specialist or advising 
attorney. The proposing official or deciding official must not discuss the 
proposal, any reply, or decision, except with the approval of the 
assigned ER Specialist or advising attorney. 

2.  Final Decision. After the employee’s reply period has expired, the deciding 

official must consult with the assigned ER Specialist. Together, the 
deciding official and the ER Specialist shall evaluate the evidence. This 
includes all documentation in support of the charge(s), as well as any 
evidence favorable to the employee and all information and arguments 
submitted by the employee and/or representative. Prior to issuing a final 
decision, the deciding official will: 

i.  Determine which, if any, of the reasons are supported by a 

preponderance of the evidence (based on the weight of evidence, the 
allegation is more likely true than untrue); 

ii.  Decide if there is a connection (“nexus”) between the misconduct and 

the efficiency of the service; and 

iii.  Uphold or reduce the proposed penalty, considering the appropriate 

“Douglas Factors”. 

3.  The ER Specialist will draft the decision letter in coordination with the 

deciding official. The final decision notice must: 

i.  Cite the notice of proposed action, the decision, and effective date of 

action;  

ii.  Indicate whether the employee replied (orally and/or in writing) and, if 

so, that the reply was considered; 

iii.  State the charge(s) that have been supported and which, if any, have 
not (deciding official may not use or rely on any information that was 
not disclosed to the employee to support the basis for the action); 

iv.  State other pertinent information and facts, including analysis of 
relevant “Douglas Factors”, relied on in making the decision;  

v.  State that the penalty promotes the efficiency of the service;  

vi.  Include the employee’s grievance or appeal rights and to whom the 
grievance or appeal should be filed and the time limits for doing so; 

vii. Include an EAP referral, if appropriate; and 

17 

 
viii. State the name and contact information of the servicing ER Specialist 
who may be contacted for clarification of rights and further assistance. 

2-3.  Employee Right to Challenge Disciplinary Actions 

Official reprimands and suspensions of 14 days or less may be grieved by non-
bargaining unit employees under the Administrative Grievance System (see 
FEMA Manual 256-3-1, Administrative Grievance System), or by bargaining unit 
employees under the negotiated grievance procedure.  

If the employee believes that the action is based on discrimination because of 
age, sex, race, religion, color, national origin, disability, genetic information, or 
sexual orientation, the employee may consult with the Office of Equal Rights. 

Employees may, as appropriate, initiate a complaint of discrimination, or file a 
grievance under the negotiated grievance procedure. However, employees may 
elect only one avenue and their election will be considered final based on which 
action is filed first. Employees may not raise complaints of discrimination under 
the Administrative Grievance System. 

2-4.  Effective Date of the Action 

A.  The effective date of the action is established by the deciding official and is 

cited in the written decision notice. 

B.  For suspensions of 14 days or less, the decision will be effected as soon as 

practicable after consideration of the employee’s reply, if any. 

C.  An application for disability retirement does not delay or prevent other 

appropriate action that may be warranted. If an employee expresses an 
interest in disability retirement, the supervisor should refer the employee to 
OCCHCO for proper guidance. 

18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS FOR EXCEPTED SERVICE EMPLOYEES 

3-1.  Applicability 

The policies and procedures of this Chapter apply to all excepted service 
employees, except for those excepted service employees who were in the 
competitive service at the time their position was first listed under Schedule A, B, 
or C and still occupies that position, or who are otherwise excluded by law or 
regulation. 

3-2. 

Initiating Disciplinary Actions 

Disciplinary Actions include official reprimands and suspensions of 14 days or 
less. An official reprimand is the lowest form of discipline. Supervisors must 
provide all documentation related to the alleged offense to the ER Specialist for 
review. The ER Specialist will draft the recommended action for review and 
signature by the supervisor. 

A.  Official Reprimand. This is a memorandum issued by a supervisor (or 
manager in the supervisory chain) and addressed to the employee.  

1.  The memorandum will include the following information: 

i.  Cite, specifically and in detail, the facts that support the reprimand, 

including rules or regulations violated. There must be sufficient detail to 
give the employee or an individual unacquainted with the situation a 
clear understanding of the reason so that the employee can grieve or 
prepare a reply; 

ii.  State the date and type of previous discipline, if any, relied upon to 

support the action; 

iii.  State that the Employee Assistance Program (EAP) is available for 

assistance and include the phone number, if appropriate; 

iv.  Advise the employee of the potential for negative consequences for 

future misconduct; 

v.  If the supervisor decides to place the official reprimand in the 

employee’s OPF, state that a copy of the reprimand will be placed in 
the employee’s OPF for a specified period, up to three years, unless 
there is sufficient cause to remove it sooner; 

vi.  State the name and contact information of the servicing ER Specialist 

who may be contacted for advice and assistance; and 

vii. Provide applicable grievance rights and right to file a complaint with the 

Office of Equal Rights. 

2.  The supervisor shall: 

19 

 
 
 
i.  Deliver the official reprimand to the employee in person in a private 

meeting. If personal delivery at work is not possible, or appropriate, the 
reprimand may be mailed or emailed to the employee. If the reprimand 
is mailed to the employee, the employee will be required to sign for the 
letter to show proof of delivery. The supervisor should ask the 
employee to acknowledge receipt of the reprimand by signing and 
dating the last page, where indicated. Acknowledgement of receipt 
does not imply that the employee agrees with the action – it simply 
indicates that the employee received a copy of the notice. If the 
employee refuses to acknowledge receipt, the supervisor should 
annotate the last page of the notice, stating that the employee refused 
to sign for it; and 

ii.  Deliver a signed and dated copy (with employee’s signature, if 

available) to the ER Specialist, so that a copy can be placed in the 
employee’s OPF, if applicable. 

B.  Suspensions without pay for 14 days or less. A proposal notice is not required 
before imposing a suspension on an excepted service employee. The ER 
Specialist will draft the decision letter in coordination with the deciding official. 
The decision letter must: 

1.  Identify, specifically, the penalty and the reason for the charge; 

2.  Describe, in detail, the facts and relevant information used to support the 

suspension; 

3.  Cite the laws, rules, regulations, and/or FEMA policies violated (if 

applicable); 

4.  Reference prior discipline, if any, used to enhance the suspension; 

5.  Include the employee’s grievance or appeal rights, to whom the grievance 

or appeal should be filed, and the time limits for doing so; 

6.  Include an EAP referral, if appropriate; 

7.  State the name and contact information of the servicing ER Specialist who 
may be contacted for clarification of rights and further assistance; and 

8.  Be delivered to the employee in person in a private meeting. If personal 
delivery at work is not possible, or appropriate, the decision may be 
mailed or emailed to the employee, with a return or read receipt requested 
to show proof of delivery or attempt to deliver. If the decision is mailed to 
the employee, the employee will be required to sign for the letter to show 
proof of delivery. The supervisor should ask the employee to acknowledge 
receipt of the document by placing their signature and date on the last 
page of the decision, where indicated. Acknowledgement of receipt does 
not imply that the employee agrees with the action – it simply indicates 
that the employee received a copy of the decision. If the employee refuses 
to acknowledge receipt, the supervisor should annotate the last page of 
the decision, stating that the employee refused to sign. Forward a signed 

20 

 
and dated copy (with the employee’s signature, if available) to the ER 
Specialist. 

3-3.  Employee Right to Challenge Disciplinary Actions 

Official reprimands and suspensions of 14 days or less may be grieved by non-
bargaining unit employees under the Administrative Grievance System (see 
FEMA Manual 256-3-1, Administrative Grievance System) or by bargaining unit 
employees under the negotiated grievance procedure. 

If the employee believes that the action is based on discrimination because of 
age, sex, race, religion, color, national origin, disability, genetic information, or 
sexual orientation, the employee may consult with the Office of Equal Rights. 

Employees may, as appropriate, initiate a complaint of discrimination, or file a 
grievance under the negotiated grievance procedure. However, employees may 
elect only one avenue and their election will be considered final based on which 
action is filed first. Employees may not raise complaints of discrimination under 
the Administrative Grievance System. 

3-4.  Effective Date of the Action 

A.  The effective date of the action is established by the deciding official and is 

cited in the written decision notice. 

B.  For suspensions of 14 days or less, the decision will be effected as soon as 

practicable. 

C.  An application for disability retirement does not delay or prevent other 

appropriate action that may be warranted. If an employee expresses an 
interest in disability retirement, the supervisor should refer the employee to 
OCCHCO for proper guidance. 

21 

 
 
 
 
 
4-1.  Applicability 

A.  The policies and procedures of this Chapter apply to the following employees: 

ADVERSE ACTIONS 

1.  A career or career conditional employee in the competitive service who is 

not serving a probationary or trial period; 

2.  An employee in the competitive service who has completed one year of 
current continuous service under other than a temporary appointment 
limited to one year or less; 

3.  An employee in the excepted service who is a preference eligible as 

defined by Title 5, U.S.C. § 105, and has completed one year of current 
continuous service in the same or similar position; 

4.  An employee in the excepted service who is non-preference eligible as 

defined by Title 5, U.S.C. § 105, and has completed two years of current 
continuous service in the same or similar positions under other than a 
temporary appointment limited to two years or less; 

5.  An employee with competitive status who occupies a position in Schedule 

B of 5 C.F.R. Part 213; and  

6.  An employee who was in the competitive service at the time his or her 

position was first listed under Schedule A, B, or C of the excepted service 
and who still occupies that position. 

B.  The policies and procedures of this Chapter do not apply to the following 

employees: 

1.  An employee whose appointment is made by and with the advice and 

consent of the Senate; 

2.  An employees whose position has been determined to be of a confidential, 
policy-determining, policy-making, or policy-advocating character by the 
President for a position that the President has excepted from the 
competitive service; the Office of Personnel Management for a position 
that the Office has excepted from the competitive service (Schedule C); or 
the President or the Administrator of FEMA for a position excepted from 
the competitive service by statute; 

3.  A Presidential appointee; 

4.  A reemployed annuitant; 

5.  A non-preference eligible employee serving a probationary or trial period 

under an initial appointment in the excepted service pending conversion to 
the competitive service, unless he or she meets the requirements of A.4.; 

6.  An employee hired under the Stafford Act or other statutory authority 

which excludes the provisions of Title 5 of the United States Code, in the 
absence of any provision to place the employee within the coverage of 
Title 5, U.S.C. Chapter 75; or 

22 

 
7.  An employee in the competitive service serving a probationary or trial 

period, unless he or she meets the requirements of A.2.  

4-2.  Types of Adverse Actions 

This Chapter addresses the following adverse actions: 

A.  Furloughs; 

B.  Suspensions without pay for 15 days or more; 

C.  Demotions; and 

D.  Removals (including removals based on unsuitability determinations that must 

be processed under 5 C.F.R. Chapter 752). 

4-3.  Formal Notice 

A.  Notice of Proposed Action. A notice of proposal is required at least 30 days 

prior to imposition of a suspension of 15 days or more, demotion, or removal 
from Federal service. The proposal notice must: 

1.  Identify, specifically, the proposed penalty and the reason or charge (e.g., 
notice of proposal to suspend from duty for 15 calendar days for absence 
without approved leave); 

2.  Describe, in detail, the facts and relevant information used to support the 

proposed action; 

3.  Cite the laws, rules, regulations, and/or FEMA policies violated (if 

applicable); 

4.  Reference prior discipline, if any, and/or any other aggravating factors 

used to enhance the proposed penalty; 

5.  Specify the employee’s rights, including: 

i.  A specific amount of time (no less than seven days) to respond orally 
and/or in writing to the proposed action, and to submit affidavits and 
other documentary evidence in support of reply (if the last day of the 
response period falls on a weekend or Federal holiday, the response 
will be due the following business day); 

ii.  A reasonable amount of official time to prepare a reply if the employee 
is in an active duty status. Normally, four to ten hours are granted, 
depending on the severity of the proposed penalty; 

iii.  Representation by an attorney or other representative, at the 

employee’s own expense;  

iv.  Right to review material relied on to support the proposed penalty; 

v.  A written decision that includes the specific reasons for the final 

decision; and 

23 

 
 
 
6.  State other pertinent information and facts, including analysis of relevant 

“Douglas Factors”, relied on in making the decision; 

7.  Include the name of the deciding official and that the employee should 
contact the ER Specialist if the employee chooses to submit an oral or 
written reply;  

8.  State the name and contact information of the servicing ER Specialist with 
whom to make arrangements for a personal reply and to whom the written 
reply should be sent. Employees may contact the ER Specialist for a copy 
of the material relied upon in proposing the action and for advice and 
assistance; 

9.  Inform the employee that requests for additional time to reply should be in 
writing and addressed to the ER Specialist for consideration. The request 
must identify the amount of time needed along with an explanation. The 
ER Specialist will coordinate requests for additional time with the deciding 
official; and 

10. Be delivered to the employee in person in a private meeting. If personal 
delivery at work is not possible, or appropriate, the notice may be mailed 
or emailed to the employee. If the notice is mailed to the employee, the 
employee will be required to sign for the letter to show proof of delivery. 
The supervisor should ask employee to acknowledge receipt of the notice 
by signing and dating the last page, where indicated. Acknowledgement of 
receipt does not imply that the employee agrees with the action -- it simply 
indicates that the employee received a copy of the notice. If the employee 
refuses to acknowledge receipt, the supervisor should annotate the last 
page of the notice, stating that the employee refused to sign for it. 

11. Once a proposal notice is issued, a proposing official or deciding official 
shall only discuss the matter with the servicing ER Specialist or advising 
attorney. 

B.  Notice of Final Decision. After the employee’s reply period has expired, the 
deciding official, in consultation with the ER Specialist, will evaluate the 
evidence. Prior to issuing a final decision, the deciding official will:  

1.  Determine which, if any, of the charges are supported by a preponderance 
of the evidence (based on the weight of evidence, the allegation is more 
likely true than untrue); 

2.  Decide if there is a connection (“nexus”) between the misconduct and the 

efficiency of the service; and 

3.  Decide on the penalty by considering the appropriate “Douglas Factors”. If 
the penalty will be a demotion, the rate of pay will be set at step 1 of the 
new lower grade. 

i.  The ER Specialist will draft the decision notice in consultation with the 
deciding official. The ER Specialist will coordinate the action with the 
Office of Chief Counsel.  

24 

 
ii.  The final decision notice must:  

a.  Cite the notice of proposed action, the decision, and effective date 

of action; 

b.  Reiterate the charge(s) or reasons; 

c.  Indicate whether the employee replied (orally and/or in writing) and, 

if so, that the reply was considered; 

d.  State what charge(s) and/or reason(s) have been supported and 

which, if any, have not (deciding official may not use any 
information that was not disclosed to the employee and 
representative to support the basis for the action); 

e.  Include an analysis of relevant “Douglas Factors”, relied on in 

making the decision; 

f.  State that the penalty promotes the efficiency of the service; 

g.  Include the employee’s grievance or appeal rights and to whom the 
grievance or appeal should be filed and the time limits for doing so; 

h.  Include an EAP referral, if appropriate; 

i.  State the name and contact information of the servicing ER 

Specialist who may be contacted for clarification of rights and 
further assistance;  

j. 

Include any applicable Career Transition Assistance Program 
(CTAP) or Interagency Career Transition Assistance Program 
(ICTAP) notices, if such notice is required; and 

k.  Contain a citation to the appropriate MSPB regulations and access 

to the appeal form. 

4-4.  Grievance and Appeal Rights 

A.  An employee has the right to submit an appeal to the Merit Systems 

Protection Board (MSPB).    

B.  Bargaining unit employees have the right to either grieve the action in 

accordance with the negotiated grievance procedures or appeal to MSPB, but 
not both. 

C.  An employee who believes he or she was subjected to a covered personnel 
action in retaliation for whistleblowing may (1), if covered by a collective 
bargaining agreement (CBA), grieve the action in accordance with the CBA’s 
grievance procedures, (2) appeal to the MSPB, or (3) appeal to the Office of 
Special Counsel. However, the employee may only elect one remedy, and the 
election is based on which action the employee files first. 

25 

 
 
D.  If the employee believes that the action is based on discrimination because of 
age, sex, race, religion, color, national origin, disability, genetic information, or 
sexual orientation, the employee may consult with the Office of Equal Rights. 

E.  Employees may, as appropriate, initiate a complaint of discrimination, or file a 
grievance under the negotiated grievance procedure. However, employees 
may elect only one avenue and their election will be considered final based 
on which action is filed first. Employees may not raise complaints of 
discrimination under FEMA’s Administrative Grievance System. 

4-5.  Effective Date of the Action 

A.  The effective date of the action is established by the deciding official and is 

cited in the written decision notice. 

B.  For suspensions of 15 days or more, demotions, or removals, the effective 

date may not be earlier than 30 days from the employee’s receipt or 
constructive notice of the proposed action. Employees are entitled to a 30-day 
advance written notice period before the effective date of the action. 

C.  An application for disability retirement does not delay or prevent other 

appropriate action that may be warranted. If an employee expresses an 
interest in disability retirement, the supervisor should refer the employee to 
OCCHCO for proper guidance. 

4-6.  Furlough Procedures 

A furlough for less than 30 continuous calendar days or 22 discontinuous 
workdays is an adverse action that temporarily forces an employee into a non-
duty and non-pay status due to lack of work, lack of funds, or other non-
disciplinary reasons (furloughs for more than 30 calendar days or 22 
discontinuous workdays are reduction-in-force actions, see FM 256-2-1, 
Reduction-in-Force/Transfer of Function). OCCHCO/Labor and Employee 
Relations must be consulted before placing an employee on a furlough. The 
above procedures apply with the following additions and exceptions: 

A.  Proposal Notice. Supervisors or managers must state the basis for selecting a 
particular employee for furlough if not all employees in a given competitive 
level are being furloughed. 

B.  An advanced written notice and opportunity to answer are not required for 

furloughs without pay due to unforeseeable circumstances, such as sudden 
breakdowns in equipment, acts of God, lapses in appropriations (when the 
lapse is uncertain until it occurs) or sudden emergencies requiring immediate 
curtailment of activities. 

26 

 
 
 
 
 
ADMINISTRATIVE LEAVE 

5-1.  Applicability 

This Chapter is applicable to employees hired under Title 5 of the United States 
Code. 

5-2.  Generally 

The use of administrative leave may be appropriate on a case-by-case basis 
when an employee’s alleged misconduct resulted in an investigation, a 
determination of unsuitability (or unfitness), suspension or revocation of a 
security clearance, or a proposed removal. When an employee is placed on 
administrative leave in connection with discipline, their access to FEMA facilities 
and information technology (IT) systems is revoked immediately. No employee 
should be placed on administrative leave without consultation with 
OCCHCO/Labor and Employee Relations. (See section 5-9 for the approval 
requirements when granting administrative leave.) 

5-3.  Employees Who Do Not Have a Security Clearance 

If an employee does not have a security clearance and is available for duty 
following receipt of an allegation of misconduct, arrest or indictment, or is under 
investigation for alleged misconduct, the supervisor must decide whether or not 
to place an employee on administrative leave. In consultation with 
OCCHCO/Labor and Employee Relations, the supervisor must consider the 
following factors: 

A.  Is there is a reasonable belief that the employee committed an offense for 

which a prison sentence may be imposed? 

B.  What is the nature of the offense? 

C.  What evidence is available related to the offense? 

D.  Was the employee arrested or indicted? 

E.  Does the known evidence suggest that the employee’s presence in FEMA 
facilities or access to FEMA IT systems constitutes a risk or direct threat? 

F.  Are there other factors that indicate that the mission will be adversely affected 

if the employee is returned to duty, such as notoriety? 

G.  If the employee’s presence in FEMA facilities is a potential threat, is the 

employee able to perform work duties from an alternate worksite, such as that 
established in an applicable telework agreement? 

27 

 
 
 
 
5-4.  Unsuitability Cases 

In unsuitability or unfitness cases, administrative leave is immediate upon notice 
from OCSO. Supervisors must work with OCCHCO/Labor and Employee 
Relations to issue the notice of administrative leave (see Chapter 8 for 
unsuitability and unfitness actions). 

5-5.  Security Clearance Cases 

An employee with a security clearance may have an affirmative duty to report to 
the OCSO when he or she has been arrested or indicted. Whenever OCSO 
discovers that an employee has been arrested or indicted, OCSO shall consider 
whether or not suspension of the clearance is appropriate. 

If an employee has a security clearance, and OCSO suspends the clearance, the 
employee may be placed on administrative leave prior to the supervisor’s 
proposal to place the employee on indefinite suspension. If OCSO restores the 
employee’s clearance, the employee may be returned to duty.   

5-6.  Removal Cases 

When a removal action is pending, a supervisor may place the employee on 
administrative leave if the supervisor believes that the employee’s continued 
presence may pose a threat to the employee or others, result in loss of or 
damage to Government property, or otherwise jeopardize legitimate Government 
interests. 

5-7.  Supervisory Responsibility and Considerations 

Prior to placing an employee on administrative leave, supervisors must consult 
with OCCHCO/Labor and Employee Relations. All cases involving employees on 
administrative leave should be reassessed every thirty (30) days to determine if 
the need still exists (the Administrator, or designee, must approve any period of 
administrative leave for 30 days or more). 

5-8.  Special Considerations When an Employee is Arrested 

Upon receipt of information that the employee has been arrested or indicted for a 
crime, the supervisor of record, FCO, or temporary duty supervisory, as 
applicable, shall notify OCSO of the charges or indictment, and shall contact 
OCCHCO/Labor and Employee Relations for guidance. 

If the employee is incarcerated or otherwise unable to come to work, the 
supervisor must address the employee’s duty status. Employees may use 
available leave, if requested and approved by the supervisor. If the request is 
denied, or if there is insufficient leave to cover the leave request, and the 
employee is not present for work, the employee shall be charged with “absence 

28 

 
 
 
   
 
without leave.” The supervisor is not obligated to approve a leave request 
submitted by the employee. In most cases, an employee is not placed on 
administrative leave when arrested or incarcerated. 

For employees who are arrested or become the subject of allegations of 
misconduct when deployed, the FCO shall make the decision as to whether the 
employee shall remain at the JFO, after consultation with the supervisor of 
record. If the supervisor of record and the FCO disagree on whether to 
demobilize the employee, the issue will be resolved by the Associate 
Administrator of Response and Recovery.  

5-9.  Approval Requirements for Administrative Leave 

The following officials have the authority to approve administrative leave: 

A.  Supervisors of record may approve up to 30 days of administrative leave; and 

B.  The Administrator, or designee, may approve more than 30 days of 

administrative leave. 

5-10.  Return to Duty 

The supervisor of record shall consult with OCCHCO/Labor and Employee 
Relations before returning an employee to duty after a period of administrative 
leave. The supervisor shall make the final decision as to whether the employee 
shall return to duty. 

29 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
EXPEDITED PROCEDURES 

6-1.  Procedural Requirements for Probationary Employees in the Competitive 

Service 

A.  The probationary period allows supervisors the opportunity to evaluate the 
employee’s performance and conduct to determine whether the employee 
should be retained beyond the probationary period. Supervisors should 
counsel employees early regarding any performance and/or conduct issues 
so that the employee may have an opportunity to correct the problem. 
Probationary employees may receive reprimands and other appropriate 
actions, in accordance with the procedures outlined in Chapters 2 and 4 of 
this policy. An instance of serious misconduct, unacceptable performance, or 
repeated instances of minor offenses during the probationary period should 
warrant removal from Federal service. 

B.  An employee will serve a one year probationary period under the following 

circumstances: 

1.  When first appointed to a career or career conditional appointment in the 

competitive service; 

i.  From a list of eligibles; or 

ii.  After reinstatement to Federal service, unless the employee served a 
completed probationary period or served with competitive status in  a 
position which affords the basis for reinstatement; 

2.  When an employee is: 

i.  Transferred to a competitive service position when the employee is a 

career or career conditional employee of another Federal agency (see 
5 C.F.R. § 315.501); 

ii.  Promoted, demoted, or reassigned before the employee completed a 
probationary period. In such circumstances, the employee is required 
to complete a probationary period in the new position; 

iii.  Reinstated to Federal service from a Reemployment Priority List. An 

employee does not need to serve a probationary period if the 
employee is being reinstated to FEMA to a position within the same 
commuting area; or 

iv.  Appointed to the competitive service by a special appointing authority 
or by conversion under Title 5, C.F.R. Part 315 Subparts F or G.   

C.  When a supervisor decides to remove a probationary employee for 

unacceptable performance or misconduct occurring during the probationary 
period, the employee is entitled to a written decision that contains the reasons 
for the action, including a narrative summary of the conclusions reached, 
effective date of the action, and limited appeal rights. The decision will also 
include the employee’s grievance or appeal rights, where to file the grievance 
or appeal, and the time limits for filing a grievance or appeal. The removal 

30 

 
notice must be delivered to the employee before the effective date of the 
action. 

D.  When a supervisor decides to remove a probationary employee, based in 

whole or in part, on conditions arising prior to appointment, the employee is 
entitled to advance written notice stating the reasons, specifically and in 
detail, for the proposed action and a reasonable time (no less than 7 calendar 
days) to file a written answer (including affidavits). The supervisor shall 
consider the response and issue a written decision at the earliest practicable 
date. The decision shall be effective no earlier than the date of issuance to 
the employee, and shall inform the employee of the reasons for the action 
and of his or her right to appeal to the Merit Systems Protection Board in 
accordance with part E below. 

E.  The employee has the right to appeal the removal to the Merit Systems 

Protection Board (MSPB) on the following grounds: 

1.  Allegations that the action was based on partisan political reasons or 

marital status; 

2.  When a probationary employee terminated for performance or misconduct 
during the probationary period, alleges that the removal was not effected 
in accordance with proper procedures; or 

3.  Allegations of discrimination because of race, color, religion, sex, national 
origin, age, or disability, but only if such an allegation is raised in addition 
to one of the issues stated in paragraph (1) or (2), above. 

6-2.  Procedural Requirements for Employees in the Career Excepted Service 

A.  This section applies to employees in the excepted service who are preference 
eligible as defined by 5 U.S.C. § 2108 and who have not completed one year 
of current continuous service in the same or similar positions, and employees 
in the excepted service who are non-preference eligible as defined by 5 
U.S.C. § 2108 and who have not completed two years of current continuous 
service in the same or similar positions under other than temporary 
appointments limited to two years or less. 

B.  Supervisors should address any performance and/or conduct issues early. 

These employees may receive reprimands or suspensions of 14 days or less 
according to the procedures in Chapter 3. An instance of serious misconduct, 
unacceptable performance, or repeated instances of minor offenses during 
the trial period should warrant removal from Federal service. 

C.  When a supervisor decides to remove an employee for unacceptable 

performance or misconduct, the employee is entitled to a written decision that 
contains the reasons for the action, including a narrative summary of the 
conclusions reached, effective date of the action, and limited appeal rights, if 
any. The removal notice must be delivered to the employee before the 
effective date of the action. 

31 

 
 
D.  Normally, the employee has no right to appeal the removal to the Merit 

Systems Protection Board (MSPB). 

6-3.  Procedural Requirements for Competitive Service Term Employees 

Term employees should be given an opportunity to demonstrate acceptable 
performance and conduct. The first year of service of a term employee is a trial 
period to determine the employee’s continued fitness for Federal service. If a 
problem occurs, supervisors should address them early so that the employee can 
have an opportunity to correct them. Employees may be reprimanded, or 
suspensions without pay may be imposed. If problems continue, removal may be 
warranted. If a decision is made to remove the employee, a written notice of 
removal should be given to the employee, explaining the reasons for the 
removal, and the effective date of the action. The notice should be delivered to 
the employee before the effective date of the action. Term employees who are 
removed during their trial period may appeal to the Merit Systems Protection 
Board under the authority of 5 C.F.R. §§ 315.804 or 805, as applicable. After an 
employee successfully completes his or her trial period, the employee will be 
subject to the discipline and adverse action procedures for competitive service 
employees (see Chapters 2 and 4). 

6-4.  Procedures for Federal Coordinating Officers 

Federal Coordinating Officers (FCO) serve in excepted service positions at the 
pleasure of the FEMA Administrator. FCOs may be suspended or removed from 
Federal service for any reason not prohibited by law. In removal actions, an FCO 
may be removed with a written notice of removal explaining the reasons for the 
removal and the effective date of the action. An FCO may not appeal a 
suspension or removal decision. 

6-5.  Procedural Requirements for Competitive Service Temporary Employees 

Temporary employees serve in short-term appointments for one year or less. 
Temporary employees do not serve a trial or probationary period. If performance 
or misconduct issues arise, a temporary employee may not be demoted or 
reassigned to a different position. In removal actions, a temporary employee may 
be removed with a written notice of removal explaining the reasons for the 
removal and the effective date of the action. A temporary employee may not 
appeal a removal decision. These procedures do not apply to employees who 
completed one year of current continuous service in a non-temporary 
appointment limited to one year or less. Such employees will be subject to the 
adverse action procedures in Chapter 4. 

32 

 
 
 
 
 
 
7-1.  Alternative Discipline 

ALTERNATIVE DISCIPLINE 

Alternative discipline is a non-traditional, constructive approach to addressing 
misconduct or performance issues, in lieu of a formal disciplinary or adverse 
action. This approach involves a written agreement that is developed through 
collaborative efforts of the employee (and representative, if any) and the deciding 
official working together to address the misconduct or performance issues.  

The goal of Alternative Discipline is also to encourage and assist the employee in 
making positive changes and to sustain acceptable behavior and/or performance. 
Alternative discipline is a management option, not an employee entitlement, and 
it does not establish a precedent as to how FEMA will handle misconduct or 
performance issues.    

7-2.  Criteria for Using Alternative Discipline 

A.  Alternative discipline may be used when: 

1.  An employee is served with a proposed discipline or adverse action 

notice; 

2.  Misconduct or performance problem(s) would not result in a removal 

proposal;  

3.  The employee admits and takes responsibility for the misconduct or 

performance issues;  

4.  The employee does not have a prior disciplinary issue within the last three 

years;  

5.  The deciding official and/or employee requests the use of alternative 

discipline; and 

6.  The employee agrees to waive any and all rights to file a grievance, 

appeal, or complaint in any form regarding any issues associated with the 
action. 

B.  Alternative discipline may not be used when: 

1.  Work-related issues involve criminal conduct; 

2.  Misconduct requires a statutory penalty (i.e., willful misuse of a 

government vehicle carries a mandatory penalty of a 30-calendar day 
suspension); 

3.  Alternative penalty is prohibited by law or regulation; or 

4.  The employee performed at an unacceptable level in any critical element 

on the performance plan or criteria. 

33 

 
 
 
7-3.  Procedures for Effecting Alternative Discipline 

A.  Prepare and issue a notice of proposed discipline; 

B.  Draft an Alternative Discipline Agreement, with assistance from an ER 
Specialist, which describes the work-related issue and the terms and 
conditions of the agreement; 

C.  If an agreement is reached, the agreement will be signed by the deciding 

official and the employee; and 

D.  If an agreement on alternative discipline is not reached, the deciding official 

will issue a decision on the proposed action. 

7-4.  Types of Alternative Discipline 

The types of discipline that may be imposed under this type of agreement 
include, but are not limited to: 

A.  Remedial training, as determined appropriate; 

B.  Reduced suspension; 

C.  Serving a suspension on non-duty days; 

D.  Serving a suspension in smaller pieces over the course of multiple pay 

periods to soften the financial impact; 

E.  Serving a suspension that exists only through a written agreement between 

the employee and the supervisor, with no loss of pay or duties. The 
documented suspension will constitute prior misconduct for purposes of 
progressive discipline; 

F.  Financial restitution; 

G.  Participation in the Employee Assistance Program and authorization for the 

counselor to talk to the supervisor; or 

H.  Holding a portion of the penalty in abeyance on the condition that, if there is 
additional misconduct the penalty or an increased penalty will automatically 
take effect. 

7-5.  Maintenance of an Agreement 

A copy of the agreement is maintained by the deciding official, employee, and the 
servicing ER Specialist. The agreement is not placed in the employee’s Official 
Personnel Folder.  

34 

 
 
 
 
 
PROCEDURES FOR NEGATIVE SUITABILITY AND FITNESS 

DETERMINATIONS 

8-1.  Unsuitability or Unfitness Actions 

A.  OCSO makes the determination on whether FEMA employees are suitable 

(or “fit”, for excepted service employees) for Federal service and notifies the 
employee’s supervisor of record in writing of the determination. 

B.  If OCSO determines that an employee is unsuitable or unfit for Federal 

service, OCSO will notify OCCHCO/Labor and Employee Relations of its 
determination at least 24 hours in advance of notifying the employee’s 
supervisor. Early notification to OCCHCO/Labor and Employee Relations will 
allow OCCHCO/Labor and Employee Relations to: 

1.  Prepare a draft letter to notify the employee of his or her required removal 

from physical and logical access to the worksite; and 

2.  Contact the employee’s supervisor to advise the supervisor on the 
procedure for retrieval of the employee’s government property, 
suspension of information technology access, and the process for 
escorting the employee from the workplace. 

C.  After the employee’s removal from the workplace, OCCHCO/Labor and 

Employee Relations will advise the supervisor on the appropriate disciplinary 
action applicable in accordance with the employee’s appointment type. 

35 

 
 
FEMA MANUAL 255-1-1  
FEMA EMPLOYEE PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT PROGRAM (EPMP) 
APPROVAL DATE: 02/21/2013 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 

OFFICE OF THE CHIEF COMPONENT HUMAN CAPITAL OFFICER 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FOREWORD 

FEMA employees are our greatest assets and the means by which the Agency achieves its 
goals and serves America. We are committed to developing highly skilled employees and a 
professionally trained workforce to guarantee quality service to the public, promote and sustain 
a high-performance culture, and achieve organizational and individual excellence. The 
provisions of the FEMA Employee Performance Management Program (EPMP) are directed to 
this purpose as they are set forth in this Manual. 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 

Foreword ................................................................................................................................................................ 2 

CHAPTER 1: GENERAL INFORMATION....................................................................................................... 4 

1-1.  Purpose ....................................................................................................................................................... 4 

1-2.  Applicability and Scope ............................................................................................................................ 4 

1-3.  Supersession ............................................................................................................................................. 4 

1-4.  Authorities/ References ............................................................................................................................ 5 

1-5.  Policy ........................................................................................................................................................... 5 

1-6.    Definitions .................................................................................................................................................. 5 

1-7     Responsibilities ......................................................................................................................................... 9 

1-8.  Reporting Requirement .......................................................................................................................... 11 

1-9.    Forms Prescribed .................................................................................................................................... 11 

1-10.  Questions ................................................................................................................................................. 11 

CHAPTER 2: PROCEDURES ......................................................................................................................... 12 

2-1.    General ..................................................................................................................................................... 12 

2-2.    Performance Planning Process ............................................................................................................ 12 

2-3.    Progress Reviews ................................................................................................................................... 15 

2-4.    Self-Assessment ..................................................................................................................................... 15 

2-5.    Developing Employees .......................................................................................................................... 16 

2-6.    Dealing with Poor Performance ............................................................................................................ 16 

2-7.    Performance Evaluation ........................................................................................................................ 17 

2-8.    Summary Rating ..................................................................................................................................... 19 

2-9.    Rating of Record Disputes .................................................................................................................... 20 

2-10.  Transfer of Rating ................................................................................................................................... 20 

2-11.  Performance Related Personnel Actions ............................................................................................ 20 

2-12.  Awards ...................................................................................................................................................... 21 

APPENDIX A – Rating Official Responsibilities under Certain Situations ................................................ 22 

APPENDIX B – Calculating the Summary Rating ......................................................................................... 27 

3 

 
 
 
  
 
CHAPTER 1:   GENERAL INFORMATION 

1-1.  Purpose 

This Manual implements 5 United States Code (U.S.C.) Chapter 43, “Performance Appraisal”,  
5 C.F.R. Part 430, “Performance Management,” Subparts A and B; and Department of 
Homeland Security (DHS) Human Resources Performance Management Guidance and 
Instruction issued on December 1, 2008 as the DHS Performance Appraisal System approved 
by the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on February 17, 2010. These documents 
assign the responsibilities and establish the policies, procedures, and requirements for the 
Federal Emergency Management Agency's (FEMA) Employee Performance Management 
Program (EPMP).  The Program is designed to support the DHS goal of promoting and 
sustaining a high-performance culture.        

1-2.  Applicability and Scope 

Generally the Program applies to all employees and supervisors whose employment is 
expected to exceed 90-days in a consecutive 12-month period who are covered by Title 5, 
United States Code (U.S.C.) Chapter 43, “Performance Appraisal,” and DHS Human 
Resources Performance Management Guidance and Instruction.  In addition, FEMA applies 
this Manual to employees hired under the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency 
Assistance Act [PL 93-288, as amended] (the Stafford Act) designated as a Cadre of 
Response Employees (CORE).  

The following individuals are excluded from coverage:  

A.  Employees who are expected to be employed for 90-days or fewer. 

B.  Presidential Appointees and others in Executive Schedules positions. 

C.  Individuals in the Senior Executive Service (SES). 

D.  Employees hired under the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance 

Act [PL 93-288, as amended], designated as Reservists.  

E.  Experts and Consultants appointed under 5 U.S.C. § 3109, “Employment of Experts and 

Consultants; Temporary or Intermittent.” 

F.  Employees who the FEMA Administrator elects to exclude from coverage.  Initially, this 
excludes all employees, who are not supervisors or are hired under the Federal Wage 
System, until the completion of negotiations and specifically included.   

1-3.  Supersession 

This Manual supersedes FEMA Instruction, Performance Management System for General 
Schedule and Prevailing Rate Employees, dated March 9, 1987 and FEMA Manual 3700.2, 
Employee Performance System, dated May 15, 1996, as updated August 9, 1999 and March 
19, 2001, for employees covered above. 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
1-4.  Authorities/ References 

A.  Title 5, United States Code (U.S.C.), Chapter 43 - Performance Appraisal; and 

B.  Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Part 430 - Performance Management; 

C.  5 U.S.C., Chapter 45 - Incentive Awards; 

D.  5 CFR, Section 293.302 - Official Personnel Folder; 

E.  5 CFR, Sections 293.401 through 293.406 - Employee Performance File System Records; 

F.  5 CFR, Part 432 - Performance Based Reduction in Grade and Removal Actions; 

G.  5 CFR, Part 451 - Awards; 

H.  5 CFR, Part 530 – Pay Rates and Systems (General); 

I.  5 CFR, Part 531 – Pay under the General Schedule; 

J.  5 CFR, Part 536 – Grade and Pay Retention; 

K.  5 CFR, Part 752 – Adverse Actions; 

L.  DHS Human Resources Performance Management Guidance and Instruction issued on 
December 1, 2008 as the DHS Performance Appraisal System approved by the Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) on February 17, 2010. 

1-5.  Policy 

A.  Adherence to merit system principles in 5 U.S.C. § 2301.  

B.  Providing a connection between an individual’s performance to the Department of 

Homeland Security and FEMA strategic plans.  

C.  Review, evaluation, and control of managerial and supervisory performance to ensure a 

continuing affirmative application and vigorous enforcement of equal employment 
opportunity policy and orientation, training, and advice to supervisors to assure their 
understanding and implementation of the equal employment opportunity policy and 
program as required by 29 C.F.R. § 1614.102(a)(5). 

D.  Creation of a fair, credible, and transparent employee performance appraisal program. 

E.  Adequate training on the Program for executives, supervisors and employees.  

1-6.      Definitions 

A.  Acceptable Level of Competence: Performance by an employee that warrants 

advancement of the employee’s rate of basic pay to the next higher step of the grade or the 

5 

 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
next higher rate within the grade as defined in 5 C.F.R. § 531.403, “Definitions,” of the 
employee’s position subject to the requirements in 5 C.F.R. § 531.404, “Earning within-
grade increase.” To be determined to be at an acceptable level of competence, the 
employee’s most recent rating of record must be at least “Achieved Expectations.”  

B.  Appraisal: The process under which performance is reviewed and evaluated. 

C.  Appraisal Program: The specific policy, procedures, and requirements set forth in DHS 
Human Resources Performance Management Guidance and Instruction issued on 
December 1, 2008 as the DHS Performance Appraisal System approved by the Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) on February 17, 2010.   

D.  Core Competencies: The measurable or observable knowledge, skills, abilities, behaviors, 
and other characteristics required by a position that have been validated and which apply 
broadly to all or many jobs within the Department. Each core competency is a critical 
element. 

E.  Critical Element: A work assignment or responsibility of such importance that Unacceptable 

performance on the element results in a determination that an employee’s overall 
performance is Unacceptable. Each core competency is a critical element. Individual 
performance goals are critical elements unless designated as team or developmental by 
the rating official in the goal title.   

F.  Developmental Performance Goal: A non-critical individual performance goal which is 

included in the employee’s performance plan to encourage and track the development and 
growth of new knowledge, skills or abilities and designated by the rating official in the goal 
title. 

G.  Element Rating Level: The performance rating level that describes an employee’s 

performance on each critical element (goal and competency) during the performance cycle. 
The 4 levels (OPM pattern E) are: 

1.  Achieved Excellence:  The employee performed as described by the “Achieved 

Excellence” standards.  This equates to a performance level of 5. 

2.  Exceeded Expectations:  The employee performed at a level between “Achieved 

Excellence” standards and the “Achieved Expectations” standards.  This equates to a 
performance level of 4. 

3.  Achieved Expectations:  The employee performed as described by the “Achieved 

Expectations” standards.  This equates to a performance level of 3. 

4.  Unacceptable:  The employee performed below the “Achieved Expectations” standards; 

corrective action is required.  This equates to a performance level of 1. 

H.  Individual Development Plan (IDP): A plan developed by the employee in conjunction with 
discussions with their supervisor that identifies an employee’s short and long-term learning 
and developmental goals. The plan contains developmental activities coupled with elective 
training, and education to acquire the competencies to meet career goals. 

I. 

Individual Performance Goals: Specific goals assigned to an employee by the supervisor 
that describe detailed results that are to be achieved and which are described in the 

6 

 
employee’s performance plan. A minimum of one goal must be assigned to an individual; 
however, three to five goals may be appropriate given the complexity and grade of the 
position. Each individual performance goal is a critical element unless defined as a 
development or team goal by the rating official in the goal title.   

J.  Interim Evaluation: A narrative description of an employee’s performance as measured 

against the performance expectations set forth in a performance plan. 

K.  Minimum Period: The 90-day period of time during which an employee must perform under 
an approved performance plan before receiving a rating of record or an interim evaluation. 

L.  Non-Critical Element: A work assignment or responsibility that is considered to be 

completed by a team or developmental in nature. A non-critical element cannot be used as 
the foundation for taking a performance-based action. Development and team performance 
goals are non-critical elements. 

M.  Opportunity to Demonstrate Acceptable Performance: A reasonable chance for an 

employee whose performance has been determined to be Unacceptable in one or more 
critical elements to demonstrate acceptable performance in the critical element(s) at issue. 

N.  Performance: The accomplishment of work assignments or responsibilities. 

O.  Performance Cycle: The 12-month time period under this Program for reviewing employee 

performance (also known as an appraisal cycle or rating cycle). 

P.  Performance Expectations: The performance goals, core competencies, and associated 

performance standards set forth in an employee’s performance plan. 

Q.  Performance Goals: See subparagraph I, “Individual Performance Goals.” 

R.  Performance Plan: A written plan that describes the performance expectations (i.e., 

performance goals, core competencies, and associated performance standard(s)) that are 
to be met during the performance cycle. 

S.  Performance Standard: The management-approved expression of the performance 
threshold(s), requirement(s), or expectation(s) that must be met to be appraised at a 
particular level of performance. A performance standard may include, but is not limited to 
quality, quantity, timeliness, and manner of performance. Performance standards under the 
Program are described at the “Achieved Expectations” and “Achieved Excellence” levels. 

T.  Progress Review: A documented discussion, typically conducted on a quarterly basis, 
between an employee and the employee’s rating official about the employee’s actual 
performance as compared to the performance expectations set forth in the employee’s 
performance plan. 

U.  Rating Official: The official, generally the first-level supervisor, who prepares the 

employee’s performance plan with input from the employee, conducts progress reviews, 
and prepares any interim evaluations and the final rating of record. 

V.  Rating of Record: A written performance appraisal that is prepared at the end of the 
performance cycle, covering an employee’s performance of assigned duties against 

7 

 
performance expectations over the entire performance cycle and includes the assignment 
of a summary rating level. 

W. Reduction-in-Grade: The involuntary assignment of an employee to a position at a lower 

classification or job grading level. 

X.  Removal: The involuntary separation of an employee from employment. 

Y.  Reviewing Official: The official, generally the employee’s second-level supervisor, who 

reviews and approves the performance plan and rating of record. 

Z.  Self-Assessment: An employee’s written assessment of their own performance of assigned 

duties and responsibilities as measured against performance expectations. 

AA.  Summary Rating Level: The performance rating level that describes an employee’s 
overall performance during the performance cycle and which is a weighted calculation 
derived mathematically from an employee’s performance on both performance goals and 
core competencies. The 4-Level (OPM Pattern E) are: 

1.  Achieved Excellence:  The employee performed as described by the “Achieved 

Excellence” standards.  This equates to a performance level of 5. 

2.  Exceeded Expectations:  The employee performed at a level between “Achieved 

Excellence” standards and the “Achieved Expectations” standards.  This equates to 
a performance level of 4. 

3.  Achieved Expectations:  The employee performed as described by the “Achieved 

Expectations” standards.  This equates to a performance level of 3. 

4.  Unacceptable:  The employee performed below the “Achieved Expectations” 

standards; corrective action is required.  This equates to a performance level of 1. 

BB.  Team Performance Goal: A non-critical individual performance goal which is included in 
the employee’s performance plan to encourage and track team or group performance 
results. 

CC.  Unacceptable Performance: The failure of an employee to meet established 

performance standards in one or more critical elements of such employee’s position. 

8 

 
 
1-7.      Responsibilities 

A.  The Administrator, FEMA, is responsible for: 

1.  Ensuring appropriate performance management training is provided to supervisors, 

executives, and employees as required by 5 CFR § 430; 

2.  Developing and communicating FEMA goals and priorities for use in developing 

individual performance goals and expectations; and 

3.  Communicating to rating and reviewing officials the results of their organization’s 

performance for consideration in preparing individual performance ratings. 

B.  Deputy Administrator, Associate Administrators, Regional Administrators, Assistant 

Administrators, Officers, and Directors are responsible for the following: 

1.  Ensuring appropriate performance management training is provided to supervisors and 

employees as required by 5 CFR § 430;  

2.  Developing and communicating FEMA goals and priorities for use in developing 

individual performance goals and expectations; and 

3.  Communicating to rating and reviewing officials the results of their organization’s 

performance for consideration in preparing individual performance ratings. 

C.  Chief Component Human Capital Officer (CCHCO) is responsible for: 

1.  Providing direction, advice, interpretation, and guidance to senior leadership, 

supervisors, and employees on compliance, policies, procedures, and requirements of 
FEMA EPMP and associated documents; 

2.  Assisting supervisors with the development of standardized goals, as appropriate, with 

employee involvement, for positions with like duties and responsibilities; 

3.  Ensuring annual receipt and maintenance of performance records of rating as required 
by the FEMA EPMP in accordance with OPM’s Guide for Personnel Recordkeeping; 

4.  Orienting and training supervisors and employees on the new program; and 

5.  Conducting ongoing training to update skills of supervisors and employees. 

D.  Reviewing Officials (Second-Level Supervisors) are responsible for: 

1.  Developing and communicating organizational goals and priorities that reflect FEMA 

and DHS strategic goals and priorities;  

2.  Developing standardized performance goals, when appropriate, with employee 

involvement, for positions with like duties and responsibilities; 

3.  Reviewing/approving performance plans prepared by rating officials (first-level 

supervisors);  

9 

 
4.  Ensuring rating officials carry out their responsibilities in a manner consistent with the 
requirements of the FEMA EPMP and accordingly assessing their performance; and 

5.  Reviewing/approving all ratings and ensuring that such ratings are supported with 

proper justification. 

E.  Rating Officials (First-Level Supervisors) are responsible for: 

1.  Developing, establishing, and updating employee performance goals to reflect the goals 
and priorities of their work unit, organization, Agency, and the Department of Homeland 
Security; and communicating clearly employee work assignments and performance 
expectations; 

2.  Providing employees with ongoing feedback, coaching, or training experiences to 

improve or enhance performance; 

3.  Supporting and working with employee on the preparation of an Individual Development 
Plan (IDP), which identifies self-improvement and training activities designed to improve 
performance and support personal career goals; 

4.  Scheduling, conducting, and documenting progress reviews to discuss performance and 

solicit feedback in a timely manner; 

5.  Encouraging their employees to complete a voluntary self-assessment prior to preparing 

the quarterly progress reviews and the annual rating of record; 

6.  Rating and documenting employee performance for the annual or early rating of record; 

7.  Documenting all quarterly progress reviews and employee self-assessment; 

8.  Addressing poor performance in a timely manner when it occurs or is discovered;  

9.  Recognizing and rewarding employee accomplishments, where warranted; and 

10. Providing the employee with a copy their annual rating of record and supporting 

documentation and the originals to the Office of the Chief Component Human Capital 
Officer (OCCHCO). 

F.  Employees.  Employees are responsible for:  

1.  Obtaining a clear understanding of their supervisor’s performance expectations and the 
connection between their work assignments, individual performance goals, and the 
goals and priorities of their unit, organization, FEMA, and the Department of Homeland 
Security;   

2.  Performing their job to the best of their abilities and asking their supervisor for guidance 

and assistance when unusual problems occur;   

3.  Seeking clarification of performance expectations and outcomes, as appropriate, 

throughout the year, but at a minimum during required quarterly progress reviews; 

4.  Participating in discussions about their performance and certifying receipt of 

performance plans, progress reviews, and annual ratings; 

10 

 
5.  Using their supervisors' feedback and suggestions to identify training needs and 

developmental opportunities to improve or enhance performance; 

6.  Providing candid feedback and commentary about their work to their supervisor; 

7.  Preparing an Individual Development Plan (IDP). 

1-8.  Reporting Requirement 

Reviewing Officials, Rating Officials, and employees will provide timely documentation of 
performance to the Office of the Chief Component Human Capital Officer (OCCHCO) as 
required. This will include individual performance goals, performance standards, and annual 
ratings of record. This information will be maintained consistent with all governing laws, 
regulations, and policies on privacy. FEMA will maintain and submit to the Department of 
Homeland Security and Office of Personnel Management (OPM) such records and reports as 
required.   

1-9.     Forms Prescribed 

A.  DHS Form 310 for GS 5-7-9 Employees (non-supervisor) 

B.  DHS Form 308 for GS 11-13 Employees (non-supervisor) 

C.  DHS Form 309 for GS 14-15 Employees (non-supervisor) 

D.  DHS Form 306 for GS 5-13 First Level Supervisors 

E.  DHS Form 307 for GS 14-15 First and Second Level Supervisors 

F.  Ratings Calculator 

1-10.   Questions 

Questions regarding this Directive should be addressed to the Office of the Chief Component 
Human Capital Officer at FEMA-Performance-Management@fema.gov. 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 2:   PROCEDURES 

2-1.    General 

FEMA Employee Performance Management Program (EPMP) performance cycle will begin on 
January 1 of each calendar year except for the Office of Chief Counsel which is on a fiscal 
year cycle, and at the beginning of an appointment, detail, or temporary promotion that is 
expected to last more than 90-days. The performance cycle will end on December 31, or as 
soon as possible thereafter and still provide the employee a minimum of 90-days under a 
performance plan following a covered appointment, detail, or temporary promotion. The 
procedures described in the following 11 sections constitute FEMA EPMP and are consistent 
DHS Human Resources Performance Management Guidance and Instruction issued on 
December 1, 2008 as the DHS Performance Appraisal System approved by the Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) on February 17, 2010. 

2-2.    Performance Planning Process 

A.  Performance planning is the critical first step in a successful performance management 

process and is an essential factor to achieving and sustaining a high-performance culture. 
At the beginning of the performance cycle, a temporary promotion that is expected to last 
more than 90-days, and upon entry into a new position, a written performance plan shall be 
developed identifying the specific performance expectations for which the employee will be 
held accountable. The Program endeavors to balance the demonstration of core 
competencies and achievement of individual performance goals. 

B.  Core Competencies.  Employee performance plans will contain pre-established core 

competencies. The DHS-wide standards for the pre-established core competencies are 
written at the “achieved expectations and “achieved excellence” level based on 
occupational series and grade.  Supervisors will use these standards when evaluating 
performance on these competencies. The average rating of all the core competencies 
comprises 40% of the annual rating of record. The core competencies are: 

1.  Communications 

2.  Customer Service (except for positions in the 1811 and 1896 series) 

3.  Representing the Agency 

4.  Teamwork/Communication 

5.  Technical Proficiency  

6.  Assigning, Monitoring, and Evaluating Work (supervisors only) 

7.  Leadership (supervisors only) 

C.  Individual Performance Goals.  The performance plan of each employee will include 

individual performance goals that describe what the employee is expected to accomplish 
during the performance cycle. While rating officials should involve employees in the 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
development of their performance goals to the extent practicable, rating officials retain sole 
discretion to determine goals. Each individual performance goal must align with 
organizational goals. The individual performance goals section of the performance plan 
accounts for 60% of the annual rating of record. 

D.  Establishing Performance Standards for Individual Performance Goals.  At the time 
performance goals are identified, rating officials will establish specific performance 
standards for each goal within the employee’s span of control. While rating officials should 
involve employees in the development of their performance standards to the extent 
practicable, rating officials retain sole discretion to determine the standards associated with 
each goal (e.g., quality, quantity, timeliness, manner of performance) at the “Achieved 
Expectations” and the “Achieved Excellence” levels. These performance standards will be 
used to evaluate progress in achieving the goals. 

E.  Assigning Weights.  Once performance goals and standards have been established, rating 
officials will assign weights to each goal. How much weight is assigned to each goal is 
discretionary. In assigning weights to goals, the rating official should take into account the 
scope of the goal, the amount of time expected to be devoted to the goal, and the impact of 
the goal on organizational operations. 

F.  Employee Involvement.  Rating officials are expected to involve employees in the 

development of their performance plans insofar as practicable. Rating officials should 
obtain input from, and engage in meaningful discussions with, employees regarding 
specific performance goals and related performance standards for which they will be held 
accountable. They should also explain what their understanding is of the core 
competencies and the associated established performance standards as applicable to the 
work unit. Finally, they should inform employees of progress review(s) that will occur during 
the performance cycle. 

G.  Individual Development Plan (IDP).  IDPs contain developmental activities coupled with 

elective training, and education to acquire the competencies to meet career goals. During 
performance planning, employees are required to develop IDPs. Management retains sole 
discretion to determine the extent to which IDPs may be supported by the organization after 
considering relevant factors, such as operational requirements and budget limitations. 

H.  Changes to Performance Plans.  Rating officials may update performance plans whenever 

they determine it is appropriate. A rating official may change a plan to reflect new 
organizational goals, to update goals and standards when outside influences beyond an 
employee’s control make the original goals and standards unachievable, or to reflect new 
organizational or management priorities. Such changes are to be documented in 
performance plans and communicated to the employee. When an individual performance 
goal is no longer applicable, then the goal weight will be adjusted to give credit to the work 
completed. If an employee’s performance plan is changed within the last 90-days of the 
performance cycle, the rating official will extend the rating period to allow for the required 
90-days under the amended performance plan before the rating of record is executed. 

13 

 
I.  Communicating with Employees.  Performance expectations must be communicated to 

employees verbally and in writing before they may be held accountable for them. 

J.  Review and Approval of Performance Plans.  Before becoming final, the employee’s 

reviewing official will review and approve the performance plan. Reviewing officials may 
adjust individual performance goals, performance standards, and goal weights to ensure 
consistency with plans established for similar positions within their jurisdiction and 
conformity with organizational goals. 

K.  Timing of Performance Plans.  Rating officials will develop and submit performance plans 
to employees within 30-days after the beginning of the performance cycle, an employee's 
entrance into a covered position, or an employee's entrance into a detail or temporary 
promotion that is expected to last more than 90-days. 

L.  Addressing Special Performance Appraisals Situations. 

1.  Changes in Position (i.e., reassignment, demotion, permanent promotion).  Employees 
who are affected by a change in position will be placed on a written performance plan 
by their new supervisor that identifies performance expectations for which the 
employees will be held accountable. See Appendix A for a detailed explanation of how 
performance is evaluated when employees are affected by changes in position.   

2.  Details.  Employees who are expected to be on detail for more than 90-days will be 

provided with a performance plan by the supervisor of the detail. See Appendix A for a 
detailed explanation of how performance is evaluated while on detail. When employees 
are on details of less than 90 days or other ad hoc assignments which take them away 
from their regular duties (such as disaster assignments), proper consideration must be 
given to adjusting work expectations and supervisors should give weight to these 
assignments when evaluating performance. 

3.  Temporary Promotions.  Employees who are expected to be temporarily promoted for 
more than 90-days will be placed on a written performance plan by the temporary 
supervisor that identifies performance expectations for which the employees will be held 
accountable. See Appendix A for a detailed explanation of how performance is 
evaluated while on temporary promotion. 

4.  Changes in Supervisor.  Employees whose supervisors change will have their current 
written performance plans re-validated by the new supervisors (or the new supervisors 
may issue new performance plans). See Appendix A for a detailed explanation of how 
employee’s performance is evaluated when employees’ supervisors change. 

5.  Transfers.  See Appendix A for a detailed explanation of how performance is evaluated 

when employees transfers out of the Department of Homeland Security. 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
2-3.    Progress Reviews 

A.  Rating officials must monitor employee performance continuously throughout the 

performance cycle and should talk with employees about progress, problems, and 
successes as frequently as possible.  Employees are encouraged to periodically share 
summaries of significant events and to ask for guidance or assistance whenever they are 
unable to independently find the information or resources they need. Progress reviews may 
take place at any time during the performance cycle; however are required quarterly.  

A Progress Review does the following: 

1.  Inform employees of their performance. 

2.  Documents discussions between the rating official and employee on performance. 

3.  Review of performance goals and results to date in light of individual performance 

standards and supervisor’s expectations. 

4.  Outline measures to correct any performance deficiencies or to improve performance 

that is otherwise acceptable. 

5.  Progress reviews do not include preliminary rating levels or calculate summary ratings 

of overall performance. 

B.  Recommended Progress Reviews.  Additional progress reviews may be appropriate 

whenever a rating official notices a significant change in performance.  The most obvious 
situation is when the rating official notices a downward turn in performance, especially if 
even one performance goal or core competency goes below expectations. Progress 
reviews also are appropriate when the rating official notices a marked improvement in 
performance.  This encourages excellence in performance by letting employees know when 
they are exceeding expectations. 

C.  Documentation of Progress Reviews.  Rating officials will document all progress reviews. 

The documentation will reflect that a discussion took place on the employee's performance; 
summarize the review; and any updates to the performance plan. The employee will be 
given the opportunity to review the document and comment then acknowledge receipt of 
the review in writing. 

2-4.    Self-Assessment 

Rating officials will encourage employees to complete a self-assessment of their performance 
prior to progress reviews and completion of the rating of record. Completion of a self-
assessment is voluntary on the part of the employee and supervisors may not coerce an 
employee into completing a self-assessment. The self-assessment may be documented under 
the employee’s progress review or ratings comments section in the form. 

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2-5.    Developing Employees 

Subject to budgetary and other organizational constraints, supervisors must provide 
employees with the proper tools and technology to do their jobs.  They must also develop 
employees to enhance their ability to perform.  Supervisors must implement formal training 
plans for employees in entry/developmental positions and for all supervisors during their first 
year of coverage under FEMA EPMP. 

2-6.    Dealing with Poor Performance 

A.  At any time during the appraisal period, if a Rating Official determines that an employee is 

performing poorly in one or more critical elements (i.e., Goals or Competencies); 
appropriate action must be taken to address the performance deficiencies as soon as 
possible. Before electing an appropriate course of action, a supervisor must consult with a 
representative from the Labor and Employee Relations (LER), Human Capital for advice, 
guidance, and to ensure proposed actions comply with applicable regulations issued in 5 
C.F.R. 432. 

1.  The supervisor should take into account all the circumstances involved, including the 

nature and gravity of the Unacceptable performance and its consequences, the extent 
to which the deficiencies may be caused by factors outside of the employee's control, 
and whether the deficiencies are based upon poor performance-and/or-misconduct. 

2.  A supervisor should consider the range of options available to address the performance 

deficiencies. Available courses of action include, but are not limited to, formal 
consultation with the employee, remedial training, an oral warning, a written warning, a 
reassignment, a proposal to reduce the employee's grade, or a proposal to remove the 
employee from Federal service. However, proposals to reduce-in-grade or remove an 
employee for Unacceptable performance under 5 C.F.R. Part 432 may be taken only 
after the employee has been given an opportunity to demonstrate acceptable 
performance, as described below except that PIPs are not required for COREs.  Certain 
categories of employees are exempt from the requirement to demonstrate acceptable 
performance as described in paragraph B including employees hired under the Stafford 
Act and probationary employees.  

3.  When an employee performs poorly, particularly on a supervisory or managerial 

competency (i.e., assigning, monitoring, and evaluating work; leadership), his or her 
manager should review previous actions taken to improve the supervisor's or manager's 
performance on these competencies. This should include review of the training (e.g., 
human resources or leadership training), coaching, or mentoring provided; actions taken 
during the supervisory probationary period or under a formal training plan; or any prior 
remedial actions that may have been taken against the supervisor for performance 
reasons. 

16 

 
 
 
 
  
B.  Opportunity to Demonstrate Acceptable Performance (prior to taking an unacceptable 

performance based action under 5 C.F.R. Part 432):   

1.  When an employee’s performance is Unacceptable in one or more critical element, the 

employee shall be afforded a reasonable opportunity to demonstrate acceptable 
performance, commensurate with the duties and responsibilities of the employee's 
position. 

2.  The employee will be advised in writing that unless his or her performance in the critical 

element(s) improves to and is sustained at an acceptable level; he or she may be 
reduced-in-grade or removed. 

3.  A PIP, if issued, must be in place for a minimum period of 60-days.As part of the 

employee's opportunity to demonstrate acceptable performance the employee shall be 
offered assistance in improving Unacceptable performance. Upon completion the 
opportunity to improve, the employee's performance is assessed, and a rating of record 
is issued by the supervisor. If a rating of record of Unacceptable is given after an 
opportunity to improve, then one of the following actions is required: reassignment, 
reduction-in-grade, or removal. Such action will be initiated within 30-days from 
issuance of the rating of record.  

4.  Within-grade increases will be delayed during the opportunity to improve. 

2-7.    Performance Evaluation 

A.  Completion of Ratings Record. 

1.  Annual Rating of Record.  Rating officials must complete ratings of record within 30-
days after the end of the performance cycle, except as otherwise provided in this 
program and summarized in Appendix A.  They should encourage employees to provide 
input about their performance and a self-assessment prior to completing the rating.  
Rating officials must submit their ratings of record to the reviewing officials who approve 
the ratings before the rating officials discuss the ratings with their employees.  The 
rating becomes final when issued to the employee with all appropriate reviews and 
signatures.  At this time, the annual rating of record becomes official for the purpose of 
any provision of title 5 CFR 430, for which an official rating of record is required.   

A rating official who has supervised an employee for less than 90-days may prepare the 
rating of record when he or she believes they are sufficiently familiar with the 
employee's work.  When preparing the rating of record with less than the 90-days 
experience as the employee’s supervisor, the new rating official will consider any 
relevant documents or notes from the progress reviews and consult with the previous 
rating and reviewing officials, if possible. If the rating official does not feel they are 
sufficiently familiar with the employee's work to complete a valid rating, then the process 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
should be moved up one level e.g., the reviewing official becomes the rating official and 
the third level supervisor then assumes the role of the reviewing official. 

2.  Early Rating.  A rating of record may be prepared within 90-days prior to the end of the 
performance cycle when warranted by a special circumstance (e.g., the employee is 
leaving the position for another position in the Department of Homeland Security; the 
rating official is leaving the position).  However, the employee must be on a 
performance plan for a minimum of 90-days in order to receive a rating of record. 

B.  Extension of Rating Period. The performance cycle may be extended for up to 90-days 

when warranted by a special circumstance.  Appendix A identifies rating official’s 
responsibilities under various situations. For example: if the employee has not met the 90-
day minimum rating period at the end of the performance cycle; or the rating official has not 
supervised the employee for 90-days and, for that reason, is not sufficiently familiar with the 
employee's work to prepare a rating of record. 

C.  Completion of Interim Evaluations.  An employee who:  (1) completes a detail or temporary 
promotion of more than 90-days; (2) moves to a new position or new supervisor within the 
Department of Homeland Security during the rating period; or (3) is under the supervision 
of a rating official who leaves his or her position prior to the last 90-days of the rating 
period, will receive an interim evaluation.  An interim evaluation will contain a written 
narrative describing the employee's performance and identifies an interim rating level for 
each performance goal and core competency, but does not assign a summary rating of 
overall performance.  The employee’s permanent supervisor will consider interim 
evaluations when the rating of record is prepared at the end of the performance cycle.  If an 
employee is on detail at the end of the performance cycle, an interim evaluation should be 
requested by the permanent supervisor for consideration. 

D.  Union Representatives.  Rating officials will not consider authorized official time spent by 
union representatives on representational matters when appraising their performance.  
Rather, rating officials will rate union representatives only on the time they devote to the 
performance of official FEMA duties provided the union representative is covered by a 
performance plan for at least the minimum 90-day period. 

E.  Consideration of Employee Input and Other Information.  The rating official will consider 
employee input (e.g., self-assessment) and any other information regarding performance 
(e.g., employee input on key results or major accomplishments, progress reviews, interim 
evaluations).  The rating official will also consider the performance of the work unit as a 
whole and resolve any inconsistencies between the two (e.g., the unit performance was 
poor but the employee's performance exceeds expectations). The rating official will then 
use one of four rating levels below to rate the employee's performance for each individual 
performance goal and core competency against the appropriate performance standard.  
The four rating levels are: 

18 

 
 
 
1.  Achieved Excellence:  The employee performed as described by the “Achieved 

Excellence” standards.  This equates to a performance level of 5. 

2.  Exceeded Expectations:  The employee performed at a level between “Achieved 

Excellence” standards and the “Achieved Expectations” standards.  This equates to a 
performance level of 4. 

3.  Achieved Expectations:  The employee performed as described by the “Achieved 

Expectations” standards.  This equates to a performance level of 3. 

4.  Unacceptable:  The employee performed below the “Achieved Expectations” standards; 

corrective action is required.  This equates to a performance level of 1. 

2-8.    Summary Rating 

The summary rating of an employee's overall performance is derived by using the rating levels 
assigned to each performance goal and additional core competency as follows: 

A.  Individual Performance Goals (Accounts for 60% of the overall summary rating):  The 

performance level assigned to each individual performance goal under this competency will 
be multiplied by its assigned weight.  The sum of the results of those calculations is 
multiplied by 60% (0.60) to determine the subtotal for this competency.  The subtotal is 
rounded to the nearest one-tenth (e.g., using standard rounding; 2.45 is rounded up to 2.5; 
and 2.44 is rounded to 2.4). However, if one individual performance goal is rated 
“Unacceptable”, then this competency is rated “Unacceptable” and the numerical rating is 0 
unless designated as a team or developmental goal by the rating official in the goal title.  

B.  Core Competencies (Accounts for 40% of the overall summary rating):  The performance 
level assigned to the core competencies will be totaled and then divided by the number of 
competencies to arrive at an average score.  The average is multiplied by 40% (0.40) to 
determine the subtotal for these competencies.  The total will be rounded to the nearest 
one-tenth as described in subparagraph (1) above.   

The two subtotal ratings will be added together to obtain the overall summary rating. This 
numeric rating is converted into one of the four summary rating levels as shown below.  A 
written justification is required to support all summary ratings.  Each core competency is a 
critical element. Individual performance goals are critical unless designated as team or 
developmental by the rating official in the goal title.  If one or more critical element is rated 
as "Unacceptable," then the summary rating must be "Unacceptable."  

C.  The summary rating is calculated using the following scale: 

1.  4.5 or higher, the summary rating is “Achieved Excellence.” 

2.  3.5-4.4, the summary rating is “Exceeded Expectations.” 

3.  2.5-3.4, the summary rating is “Achieved Expectations.” 

19 

 
 
 
 
 
 
4.  Less than 2.5, the summary rating is “Unacceptable.” 

Forced distributions of ratings and/or quotas for ratings are not permitted at any rating level.  
This prohibition does not prevent management officials from making distinctions among 
employees or groups of employees based on performance for other purposes (e.g., for 
award determinations). 

D.  FEMA management officials may not lower the rating of record of an employee due to an 
approved absence from work.  This includes the absence of a disabled veteran to seek 
medical treatment as provided in Executive Order 5396. 

2-9.    Rating of Record Disputes 

Employees are encouraged to informally resolve concerns over their ratings of record with their 
rating and reviewing officials.  Supervisors are expected to engage in open and constructive 
dialogue with employees about performance and to prevent and resolve workplace disputes.  If 
the concerns remain unresolved, employees may pursue them through the appropriate dispute 
resolution processes.  

Bargaining unit employees may grieve a rating of record through a negotiated grievance 
procedure where an applicable procedure exists and covers such grievances.  Bargaining unit 
employees should refer to their negotiated agreement for the applicable grievance procedures. 

A non-bargaining unit employee may grieve a rating of record using FEMA’s Administrative 
Grievance System. 

A FEMA employee may use the Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) complaint process in 
29 CFR 1614, if he or she believes the performance rating of record is based on unlawful 
discrimination and/or harassment. 

An employee or supervisor may utilize the Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) process, 
which provides supervisors and employees the resources to support collaboration and resolve 
differences. 

2-10.    Transfer of Rating 

According to OPM’s, “Guide to Personnel Recordkeeping and the National Archives General 
Records Schedules,” the three most recent ratings of record within the last 4 years will transfer 
when an employee is reassigned. Performance records transferred from a previous employer 
may be filed with records created by the Agency. 

2-11.    Performance Related Personnel Actions 

The governing applicable laws, regulations, and department and agency directives provide for 
ratings of record to be used as a basis for taking appropriate personnel actions. 

Ratings of record will be used as a basis for making: 

20 

 
A.  Within-grade increase determinations under 5 CFR part 531, subpart D, “Within-Grade 
Increases,” or quality step increases under 5 CFR part 531, subpart E, “Quality Step 
Increase” (for example: for a within-grade increase, an employee's most recent rating of 
record must be at least “Achieved Expectations;” and for a quality step increase, an 
employee's most recent rating of record must be at least “Achieved Excellence;” and 

B.  A pay determination under any other applicable law or regulation consistent with governing 

the Department of Homeland Security Management Directives and policies. 

C.  Reduction-in-force.  Ratings of record will be used during reductions-in-force as provided in 

5 CFR Part 351. 

D.  Promotions.  Ratings of record will be used in promotions consistent with governing laws 

and regulations and negotiated agreements. 

E.  Other Purposes.  Ratings of record will be used for other purposes consistent with 
governing laws, regulations, Department and Agency directives, and negotiated 
agreements. 

2-12.    Awards  

Ratings of record may be used as a basis for determining whether to grant an award under  
5 U.S.C. chapter 45, 5 CFR Part 451, and Department and Agency directives. 

21 

 
 
 
 
APPENDIX A – Rating Official Responsibilities under Certain Situations 

Nature of Action 
(NOA) 
Permanent Change in 
Position 
[Reassignment, 
Demotion, or 
Promotion (including 
Career Ladder 
Promotions)] and 
there is a Change in 
Supervisor. 

Prior to the Last 90-days  
of the Performance Cycle 
OLD SUPERVISOR:  
Executes an interim 
evaluation if the employee 
has been on a performance 
plan for more than 90-days. 

During the Last 90-days  
of the Performance Cycle 
OLD SUPERVISOR: 
Executes a rating of record if 
the employee has been on a 
performance plan for more 
than 90-days. 

NOTE:  No action required, if 
the employee has not been 
on a performance plan for 
more than 90-days. 

NOTE:  If the old supervisor 
does not execute a rating of 
record.  

Permanent Change in 
Position 
[Reassignment, 
Demotion, or 
Promotion (including 
Career Ladder 
Promotions)] and 
there is no Change in 
Supervisor. 

NEW SUPERVISOR: 
Places the employee on a 
new performance plan and 
extends the performance 
cycle, up to 90-days, until 
such time as the employee 
has been on the plan for 90-
days. 
Executes a rating of record.   
Places the employee on a 
new performance plan. 

SUPERVISOR: 
Executes a rating of record if 
the employee has been on a 
performance plan for more 
than 90-days. 
Places the employee on a 
new performance plan, at the 
beginning of the new 
performance cycle. 

NEW SUPERVISOR:  
Places the employee on a 
new performance plan. 
At the end of the annual 
performance cycle executes a 
rating of record on the new 
performance plan, giving 
consideration to the interim 
evaluation completed by the 
losing supervisor.  

SUPERVISOR:  
Executes an interim 
evaluation if the employee 
has been on a performance 
plan for more than 90-days.   
NOTE:  No action required, if 
the employee has not been 
on a performance plan for 
more than 90-days. 
Places the employee on a 
new performance plan. 
At the end of the annual 
performance cycle, executes 
a rating of record, on the new 
performance plan, giving 
consideration to any interim 
evaluations. 

22 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nature of Action 
(NOA) 
Detail of More than 
90-days. 

During the Last 90-days  
of the Performance Cycle 
DETAIL SUPERVISOR:  
Places the employee on a 
performance plan. 
Completes an interim 
evaluation at the end of the 
detail. 

SUPERVISOR OF RECORD: 
Executes a rating of record at 
the end of the performance 
cycle considering any interim 
evaluations provided. 
Places the employee on a 
new performance plan at the 
beginning of the new 
performance cycle. 

Prior to the Last 90-days  
of the Performance Cycle 
SUPERVISOR OF RECORD: 
No action when the employee 
leaves for detail. 
At the end of the annual 
performance cycle, executes 
a rating of record, giving 
consideration to the interim 
evaluation completed by the 
detail supervisor. 

DETAIL SUPERVISOR:  
Will place the employee on a 
performance plan. 
Executes an interim 
evaluation when the detail is 
completed, (which is 
considered by the supervisor 
of record when executing the 
rating of record) if the detail 
ends during the performance 
cycle. 
Executes an interim 
evaluation at the end of the 
performance cycle if the detail 
extends beyond the end of 
the performance cycle, (which 
is considered by the 
supervisor of record when 
executing the rating of 
record).  

23 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nature of Action 
(NOA) 
Temporary Promotion 
of More than 90-days. 

Prior to the Last 90-days  
of the Performance Cycle 
PERMANENT SUPERVISOR: 
Temporary promotion begins 
and employee leaves 
permanent position: 
Executes an interim 
evaluation if the employee 
has been on the plan for more 
than 90-days. 
Ensures plan then becomes 
inactive. 

During the Last 90-days  
of the Performance Cycle 
PERMANENT SUPERVISOR: 
Temporary promotion begins 
and employee leaves 
permanent position: 
Executes a rating of record if 
the employee has been on a 
performance plan for 90-days.
No action required, if the 
employee has not been on a 
plan for 90-days. 

Temporary promotion ends 
and employee returns to 
permanent position : 
Reactivates the performance 
plan for permanent position. 
Executes a rating of record at 
the end of the performance 
cycle giving consideration to 
all interim evaluations 
completed during the 
performance cycle.  

TEMPORARY 
SUPERVISOR:  
Temporary promotion begins 
and employee arrives at 
temporary promotion position: 
Places the employee on a 
new performance plan. (The 
employee’s performance plan 
from the permanent position 
becomes inactive). 
If the temporary promotion 
ends prior to the last 90-days 
and employee returns to 
permanent position: 
Completes an interim 
evaluation. 
The Performance Plan for the 
permanent position is 
reactivated. 

24 

TEMPORARY 
SUPERVISOR:  
Temporary promotion begins 
and employee arrives at 
temporary promotion position: 
If the permanent supervisor 
does execute a rating of 
record, then the temporary 
supervisor waits until the 
beginning of the new 
performance cycle and places 
the employee on a new 
performance plan based on 
the higher grade. 
If permanent supervisor does 
not complete a rating of 
record due to the 90-day 
requirement, it is strongly 
recommended the temporary 
supervisor place the 
employee on a performance 
plan and extend the 
performance cycle until such 
time as the employee has 
been on the plan for 90-days 
and then execute a rating of 
record.  Otherwise, the 
employee will NOT receive a 
rating of record for that year. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
During the Last 90-days  
of the Performance Cycle 
DEPARTING SUPERVISOR:  
Executes a rating of record.  
If the departing supervisor 
does not complete the rating 
of record prior to leaving, the 
Reviewing Official may then 
execute the rating of record at 
the end of the performance 
cycle. 

NOTE:  If the departing 
supervisor or reviewing official 
does not execute a rating of 
record, then: 

NEW SUPERVISOR: 
Executes a rating of record if 
familiar with the employee’s 
performance or, if not familiar, 
extends the performance 
cycle. 
If the employee was never 
previously issued a 
performance plan, NEW 
SUPERVISOR may place the 
employee on a new 
performance plan and extend 
the performance cycle to 
meet the 90-day requirement. 
At the beginning of the new 
performance cycle, places the 
employee on a new 
performance plan. 

Nature of Action 
(NOA) 
Change in Supervisor 
(Employee is not 
moving). 

Prior to the Last 90-days  
of the Performance Cycle 
DEPARTING SUPERVISOR:  
Executes an interim 
evaluation. 

NEW SUPERVISOR:  
May re-validate (by 
discussing and re-signing) the 
performance plan created by 
the departing supervisor or 
place the employee on a new 
performance plan. 
At the end of the performance 
cycle, executes a rating of 
record. 

25 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nature of Action 
(NOA) 
Transfer to a position 
outside the 
Department of 
Homeland Security 
and its Components. 

Prior to the Last 90-days  
of the Performance Cycle 
DEPARTING SUPERVISOR:  
Executes a rating of record 
(which is transmitted to the 
gaining agency) if the 
employee has been on a 
performance plan for at least 
90-days. 

During the Last 90-days  
of the Performance Cycle 
DEPARTING SUPERVISOR:  
Executes a rating of record 
(which is transmitted to the 
gaining agency) if the 
employee has been on a 
performance plan for at least 
90-days. 

NOTE:  No action required, if 
the employee has not been 
on a plan for 90-days. 

NOTE: No action required, if 
the employee has not been 
on a plan for 90-days.  

26 

 
 
 
 
 
 
The summary rating based on the individual ratings entered. 

APPENDIX B – Calculating the Summary Rating 

3.35 

2.65 

Employee - 
Beth 

Employee – 
Alex 

Supervisor - 
Bob 

55% x 2 = 1.10  40% x 4 = 1.60  30% x 4 = 1.20 
25% x 3 = 0.75  25% x 3 = 0.75  20% x 3 = 0.60 
20% x 4 = 0.80  20% x 2 = 0.40  10% x 2 = 0.20 
15% x 4 = 0.60  20% x 2 = 0.40 
20% x 4 = 0.80 
3.20 

SUMMARY RATING 
CALCULATION 
A. Individual Performance Goals – At least one (usually three to five) individual 
performance goals each with a weight. Goal Weight x Goal Rating = Goal Result 
Individual Performance Goal 1 
Individual Performance Goal 2 
Individual Performance Goal 3 
Individual Performance Goal 4 
Individual Performance Goal 5 
Sum of all Goals Results = 
Subtotal A1 
B. Core Competencies – The five pre-established competencies are weighted equally. 
For supervisors assigning, monitoring and evaluating work and leadership are 
weighted 25% each.  
Technical proficiency 
Customer service  
     (except 1811 and 1896)  
Teamwork/cooperation 
Communications 
Representing the agency 
Assigning, monitoring, & 
      evaluating work  
Leadership  
Average of Additional 
      Ratings = Subtotal B 
C. Summary Rating Calculation  
Subtotal A x 60% = Summary 
Rating A2 

3 
22  7 = 3.14 

N/A 
15  4 = 3.75 

N/A 
13  5 = 2.60 

3 
2 
2 
N/A 

3 
4 
4 
N/A 

3.35 x 0.60 = 
2.0 

3.20 x 0.60 = 
1.9 

2.65 x 0.60 = 
1.6 

4 
N/A 

3 
3 
4 
2 

3 
4 

3 
3 

Subtotal B x 40% = Summary 
Rating B  
Rating Total 

D. Rating Total = Summary 
Rating 

2.60 x 0.40 = 
1.0 
2.6 
Achieved 
Expectations 

3.75 x 0.40 = 
1.5 
3.5 
Exceeded 
Expectations 

3.14 x 0.40 = 
1.3 
3.2 
Achieved 
Expectations 

Achieved Excellence: 4.5 or higher. 
Exceeded Expectations: 3.5– 4.4. 
Achieved Expectations: 2.5 – 3.4. 
Unacceptable: Less than 2.5.  

1 If one individual performance goal or other competency is rated 0 (Unacceptable), then the Summary Rating is 0 unless 
designated as team or developmental by the rating official in the goal title. 
2 The total is rounded to the nearest one-tenth (e.g., using standard rounding, 2.45 is rounded up to 2.5; 2.44 is rounded to 
2.4). 

27 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
28 

 
 
FEMA MANUAL 256-3-1  
ADMINISTRATIVE GRIEVANCE SYSTEM 

APPROVAL DATE: 09/12/2014 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 

FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY 

OFFICE OF THE CHIEF COMPONENT HUMAN CAPITAL OFFICER 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Foreword 

This Manual provides guidance and policy direction for the administration, 
implementation, and oversight of the Federal Emergency Management Agency's 
(FEMA) Administrative Grievance System. 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 

Foreword ........................................................................................................................ 1 

CHAPTER 1 - GENERAL INFORMATION ..................................................................... 3 

1-1.

  Purpose ................................................................................................................ 3 

1-2.

  Applicability and Scope ........................................................................................ 3 

1-3.

  Supersession ........................................................................................................ 5 

1-4.

  Authorities/References ......................................................................................... 5 

1-5.

  Policy .................................................................................................................... 5 

1-6.

  Definitions ............................................................................................................. 6 

1-7.

  Responsibilities ..................................................................................................... 7 

1-8.

  Questions ............................................................................................................. 8 

CHAPTER 2 - PROCEDURES ....................................................................................... 9 

2-1.

  Time Limits ........................................................................................................... 9 

2-2.

  Step 1 Grievance Procedures............................................................................... 9 

2-3.

  Step 2 Grievance Procedures............................................................................. 10 

CHAPTER 3 - SPECIAL ISSUES ................................................................................. 13 

3-1.

  Cancellation of Grievances ................................................................................. 13 

3-2.

  Allegations of Employment Discrimination .......................................................... 13 

3-3.

  Group Grievances .............................................................................................. 13 

3-4.

  Disallowance of a Grievant’s Choice of Representative ..................................... 13 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1 - 

GENERAL INFORMATION 

1-1.

  Purpose 

This Manual establishes the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s 
(FEMA’s) Administrative Grievance System (AGS). The AGS provides a fair and 
timely forum for internal review and resolution of employment-related disputes 
that is consistent with Department of Homeland Security (DHS) policy. 

1-2.

  Applicability and Scope 

This Manual applies FEMA-wide to the following employees and situations:   

A.  Employee Coverage: 

1.  Except as provided in Section 1-2.A.2.b below, this AGS applies to 

employees in FEMA and former employees (hereafter employees) for 
whom a remedy consistent with law and regulation can be provided by 
FEMA. 

2.  The following employees are not covered by this Manual: 

a.  Employees hired under the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and 

Emergency Assistance Act. 

b.  Employees in an exclusive bargaining unit with a negotiated grievance 
procedure covering the matter being grieved under 5 United States 
Code (U.S.C.) Chapter 71. 

c.  Individuals paid from non-appropriated funds.   

B.  Grievance Coverage: 

1.  Matters Covered - Except as provided in 1-2.B.2 below, this AGS applies 
to any matter of employee concern or dissatisfaction for which personal 
relief is possible and is subject to the control of FEMA management, 
including any matter in which an employee alleges that coercion, reprisal, 
or retaliation occurred against him/her for using this grievance system.   

2.  Matters Not Covered - The following matters are not covered: 

a.  The content of DHS or FEMA policy, directive, manual, or regulation. 

b.  A matter that the employee may: 

i.  Grieve under a negotiated grievance procedure (5 U.S.C. 7121); or 

ii.  Appeal or challenge with another organization or forum (such as: 
the Merit Systems Protection Board; U.S. Office of Personnel 
Management; Federal Labor Relations Authority; or Equal 
Employment Opportunity Commission) that has authority to grant a 
remedy. Examples include: removals; suspensions for more than 
14 days; classification of a position; unfair labor practices; and 
allegations of discrimination. 

3 

 
 
c.  Non-selection for promotion from a group of properly ranked and 

certified candidates, a promotion for which competition was previously 
held, or failure to receive a noncompetitive promotion. 

d.  A preliminary warning, proposal, or notice (to include but not limited to, 

verbal and written counseling). 

e.  An action terminating a probationary employee or an employee serving 

a trial period, including the return of an employee from an initial 
appointment as a supervisor or manager to a non-supervisory or non-
managerial position, for failure to successfully complete the 
probationary period. 

f.  The assignment of work.  

g.  The substance of an employee’s performance plan or evaluation.  

h.  Quarterly reviews and interim appraisals.  

i.  The non-adoption of a suggestion.  

j.  The failure to receive, or the amount of, a monetary or non-monetary 

award, including a quality-step or quality-rate increase.   

k.  A decision to grant or not grant a Senior Executive Service (SES), 

Senior Level (SL), or Scientific or Technical (ST) pay rate increase or 
Presidential Rank, performance, or other SES award.  

l.  The performance evaluation of a SES appointee; reassignment of SES 
appointee following receipt of an unsatisfactory rating; the return of a 
SES career appointee to the General Schedule or other pay system 
during the one year probationary period or for less than fully successful 
performance; the termination of a SES career appointee during 
probation for unacceptable performance.   

m.  The payment of, the failure to pay, or the amount of a recruitment 
bonus, a relocation bonus, a retention allowance (including its 
termination), student loan repayment, or a supervisory differential; or 
the amount of critical position pay; or failure to request or grant an 
exception to dual-compensation restrictions. 

n.  The interpretation, application, or effect of collective bargaining 

agreement provisions.   

o.  Relief that is not personal to the grievant or is not subject to FEMA 

management control.   

p.  The termination or expiration of a time-limited (temporary, term, SES 
limited emergency or limited term) appointment or promotion, on the 
date specified or at any other time, if the employee was informed in 
advance of the time-limited nature of the appointment or promotion 
and, if a promotion, the employee was returned to his or her prior 
position or a position of equivalent grade and pay. 

4 

 
 
q.  The disallowance of an employee’s representative. 

r.  The final decision made on a grievance or how the grievance was 

processed. 

s.  Any issue currently under audit or investigation by the Office of 

Inspector General, DHS, the Merit Systems Protection Board, the US 
General Accountability Office, or other appropriate adjudicative 
authority. 

1-3.

  Supersession 

This Manual supersedes FEMA Manual 3300.1, FEMA Administrative Grievance 
System, dated September 29, 1992. 

1-4.

  Authorities/References 

A.  Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.) Part 771, Agency Administrative 

Grievance System. 

B.  Title 5, C.F.R. 300, Employment (General). 

C.  Title 29 C.F.R. Part 1614, Federal Sector Equal Employment Opportunity. 

D.  DHS Management Directive 256-02, Administrative Grievance System, dated 

May 31, 2007. 

1-5.

  Policy 

A.  It is in the interest of the employee and supervisor to resolve grievances at 

the lowest level possible. The employees and supervisors should consider a 
grievance as a mutual problem and work together toward a satisfactory 
resolution. Mutual and satisfactory resolution works best when: the grievant 
and representative focus on describing the concern(s) and satisfactory 
remedies; the supervisor focuses on providing a full explanation and a fair, 
creative, and prompt resolution; and all parties focus on the issues and avoid 
personal recriminations and accusations of bad faith. 

B.  This Manual endorses the importance of promptly recognizing, preventing, 
and/or resolving employment-related disputes, and treating all employees 
reasonably and fairly. It is FEMA policy to ensure: 

1.  Freedom from Adverse Impact. An employee’s initiation of a grievance in 

good faith : 

a.  Is permitted without restraint, interference, coercion, discrimination, or 

reprisal. 

b.  Will not adversely impact his/her standing with the supervisor or call 

into question the employee’s loyalty or importance to FEMA.   

c.  Will not reflect negatively on the employee’s supervisor or on FEMA 

management.  

2.  Informal Resolution When Possible. Supervisors and managers will strive 

to resolve grievances informally and at the lowest level possible. 

5 

 
 
3.  Employee Rights. 

a.  Right to Present a Grievance.   

b.  Right to Representation. An employee may present a grievance with or 
without representation. A grievant may be advised, represented, and 
accompanied by a representative of his or her choice who is a willing 
participant. FEMA management may disallow a chosen representative 
if the particular individual would: 

i.  Result in a conflict of interest or position;  

ii.  Conflict with a priority need of FEMA or the Government; or 

iii.  Result in unreasonable cost.  

4.  Right to Official Time to Prepare and Present a Grievance. The grievant 

and representative, if otherwise in an active duty status and with the prior 
approval of his/her respective supervisor, are allowed a reasonable 
amount of official time to prepare and present a grievance. 

5.  Right to Payment of Reasonable Expenses. The salary for any employee 
participating in a grievance as a grievant, representative, fact finder, 
witness, etc., will be paid in the same manner as if the employee were on 
a regular work assignment, provided the use of official time is authorized 
and approved in advance by the employee’s supervisor. Overtime work 
may not be approved for this purpose. Travel, per diem, contract services, 
and other expenses directly related to fact finding may be paid when 
reasonable and approved in advance by the Chief of Employee Relations.  

6.  Right to Communicate. The grievant and representative may communicate 
with and seek advice or information from appropriate sources, including 
the Office of the Chief Component Human Capital Officer (OCCHCO), and 
a supervisor or management official with knowledge or information 
relevant to the grievance. This communication may be by telephone, 
email, letter, or in person, by appointment. The grievant and his/her 
representative may use existing agency communications facilities (e.g., 
mail, telephone and email). The grievant is responsible for other costs 
incurred unless approved in advance by the Chief of Employee Relations.  

1-6.

  Definitions 

A.  Administrative Grievance. An employee’s dissatisfaction or dispute in the 

workplace for which there is no other form of review within or outside FEMA.  
One employee (or a group of employees acting as individuals) may submit a 
written request for personal relief in a matter of concern or dissatisfaction 
relating to the employee’s employment that is subject to the control of FEMA 
management and not excluded by 1-2.B.2 above or by an applicable statute 
or regulation.   

B.  Day. Means calendar day. When counting days, day one is the first calendar 
day following the act or occurrence; for example, the receipt of the grievance, 
the receipt of a decision, etc. 

6 

 
 
C.  Deciding Official. A management official who is at a higher level than the 

supervisor or management official responsible for the matter being grieved 
and who was not involved in making or influencing a decision directly related 
to the matter being grieved. Note: If the Administrator is the grievant’s first or 
second-level supervisor, he/she may delegate the Deciding Official 
responsibilities to another management official.  

D.  Fact Finder. A person designated to investigate a grievance, make findings of 
fact, and write a report of investigation. A Fact Finder may not be subordinate 
to any official substantively involved in the matter being grieved. The Fact 
Finder is a neutral party and shall not be involved in making or influencing a 
decision regarding the matter(s) being grieved or the grievance itself. 

E.  Grievant. A current or former employee, or group of FEMA employees, who 
has filed a grievance and for whom an appropriate remedy can be provided. 

F.  Personal Relief. A specific action, explanation, or remedy personally 

benefiting the grievant(s). It may not include disciplinary or other action 
affecting another employee, including a supervisor or management official. 

G.  Official Time. Duty time during which an employee is authorized by a 

supervisor to prepare and present a grievance. 

H.  Representative. A person designated by the grievant who has agreed to 

advise, assist, or represent the grievant in the preparation and/or presentation 
of a grievance. 

1-7.

  Responsibilities 

A.  The FEMA Administrator is responsible for establishing FEMA-wide policies 

and procedures for Administrative Grievances consistent with DHS 
requirements. 

B.  The Chief Component Human Capital Officer is responsible for: 

1.  Developing and updating AGS policies and procedures.  

2.  Ensuring that managers, supervisors, and employees are notified of 

current policies, procedures, and changes thereto.  

C.  The Chief of Employee Relations is responsible for:  

1.  Providing confidential advice on matters covered by this policy and 

procedures to employees, supervisors, and managers. 

2.  Ensuring compliance with AGS policies and procedures. 

3.  Deciding what is a reasonable amount of official time for the grievant and 
representative, if any, to prepare and present a grievance, when the 
supervisor and employee disagree. 

4.  Deciding whether or not to disallow a grievant’s choice of representative.  

5.  Appointing an individual to act as Fact Finder. 

6.  Deciding whether or not to approve fact finding expenses. 

7 

 
 
7.  Deciding whether or not to approve a grievant’s communication costs. 

D.  Deciding Officials are responsible for: 

1.  Giving each grievance full, impartial, and prompt consideration. 

2.  Ensuring their review includes, but is not limited to, the following: 

a.  A review of all issues of fact. 

b.  A review for compliance with relevant published regulations and 

applicable DHS directives, manuals, and instructions.  

c.  A review for compliance with relevant published FEMA directives, 

manuals, policies, and procedures.  

E.  Managers and Supervisors are responsible for:  

1.  Acting constructively, promptly, fairly, and in concert with this Manual on 

any issue raised as a grievance. 

2.  Notifying Employee Relations immediately following any discussion with 

an employee regarding a planned or potential grievance.  

3.  Seeking advice, guidance, and assistance from Employee Relations when 

needed to resolve a grievance.   

4.  Authorizing a reasonable amount of official time for employees and their 

representatives to prepare and present a grievance. 

F.  Employees with a grievance, concern, dissatisfaction, or dispute are 

responsible for: 

1.  Exercising their grievance rights constructively.  

2.  Contacting Employee Relations for confidential advice, if any is wanted.   

3.  Complying with the requirements of this Manual when filing a grievance. 

1-8.

  Questions 

Questions concerning the Administrative Grievance system should be addressed 
to the Office of the Chief Component Human Capital Officer at (202) 646-3962. 

8 

 
 
 
 
2-1.

  Time Limits 

CHAPTER 2 - 

PROCEDURES 

A.  Employees must submit a grievance within the time limits below, unless the 
employee can show the delay was caused by circumstances beyond his/her 
control.   

B.  Short time extensions may be granted by the grievant’s supervisor and/or 
Employee Relations, but must be reasonable and documented. Employee 
Relations may approve extensions due to illness, unforeseeable 
emergencies, etc. that are reasonable for the circumstance(s). Extensions will 
be documented, and the days granted are not counted. 

C.  When counting days, day one is the first calendar day following the act (or 
occurrence) or the first calendar day following receipt of a grievance or 
response.   

2-2.

  Step 1 Grievance Procedures 

A.  An employee’s Step 1 grievance shall be considered timely filed if filed: 

1.  Within 15 days of the date of the act or within 15 days after the employee 
first became aware or should have become aware of the action; or   

2.  Within 15 days of the date of the most recent act of a continuing practice 

or condition. 

B.  An employee’s Step 1 grievance must be submitted to the employee’s first 

line supervisor or management official responsible for the action grieved and 
must: 

1.  Be in writing.   

2.  Describe the basis for the grievance, providing sufficient detail to clearly 

identify the issue(s) of concern or nature of the dispute.   

3.  Describe the personal relief requested. 

4.  Include any relevant documents available. 

5.  List of any similar complaints, appeals, or administrative grievances that 

the grievant has filed or expects to file. 

6.  Provide his/her name, address, and telephone number and that of his/her 
representative, if any, plus evidence the representative has agreed to 
represent the grievant. 

C.  Upon receipt of a Step 1 grievance the supervisor or management official will:   

1.  Notify Employee Relations that a grievance was submitted.   

2.  Send a copy of the grievance and any relevant documents or additional 

information to Employee Relations. 

9 

 
 
D.  The supervisor or management official will provide a written response either 
granting or denying the grievance and describing any relief granted to the 
grievant, and representative, if any, within 30 days of receipt.  

1.  In deciding the grievance, the supervisor will review the grievance and all 

relevant information submitted with the grievance, consider the 
employee’s views, and seek advice or additional information as 
necessary. 

2.  The supervisor may, at his or her option, meet with the grievant and/or 

representative, if any, to gather additional information or allow the grievant 
to present additional information.   

3.  After rendering a decision, the supervisor shall send the grievance, with 

any notes, additional information, and his or her written reply to Employee 
Relations. 

2-3.

  Step 2 Grievance Procedures 

A.  An employee’s Step 2 grievance shall be considered timely filed, if: 

1.  A Step 1 grievance was timely filed; and 

2.  A Step 2 grievance is filed within five days of the receipt of the written 

reply to the Step 1 grievance or, if no Step 1 decision was received, within 
five days after the Step 1 decision was due. 

B.  An employee’s Step 2 grievance must be submitted to the management 

official one level above the Step 1 official and must: 

1.  Be in writing.   

2.  Only include issues raised in the Step 1 grievance, providing sufficient 

detail to clearly identify the issue(s) of concern or nature of the dispute.   

3.  Describe the personal relief requested. 

4.  Include any relevant documents available. 

5.  Include a copy of the Step 1 grievance and reply, if any. 

6.  List of any similar complaints, appeals, or administrative grievances that 

the grievant has filed or expects to file. 

7.  Provide his/her name, address, and telephone number and that of his/her 
representative, if any, plus evidence the representative has agreed to 
represent the grievant.   

C.  Upon receipt of a Step 2 grievance the Deciding Official will: 

1.  Acknowledge receipt by email within two days of receiving a Step 2 

grievance; and 

2.  Work with Employee Relations. 

10 

 
 
   
 
D.  The Deciding Official will: 

1.  Within five days of receiving the grievance, review the grievance and 

request or decline the appointment of a Fact Finder through Employee 
Relations and notify the grievant and representative, if any, whether a Fact 
Finder has been requested.  

2.  If a Fact Finder is appointed, the Deciding Official shall render a decision 
within 20 days after receipt of the Fact Finder’s report. The Deciding 
Official shall review the grievance, Fact Finder’s report, and grievant’s 
comments, if any. The Deciding Official may choose to meet with the 
grievant and or their representative during this period.  

3.  If a Fact Finder is not appointed, the Deciding Official shall render a 

decision within 60 days after receiving the grievance. The Deciding Official 
shall review the grievance and grievant’s comments, if any. The Deciding 
Official may choose to meet with the grievant and or their representative 
during this period.   

4.  Render a written decision which includes relevant findings of fact, reasons 
for the decision, a decision granting, not granting, or partially granting the 
personal relief requested, actions needed to implement the decision, the 
time-table for implementation, and a statement that the decision is final 
and binding on FEMA and the grievant. The decision shall be sent to the 
grievant and representative, if any, the grievant’s supervisor or 
responsible management official, and the Chief of Employee Relations. 

5.  Within five days after submitting the written decision, send the signed 
response to Employee Relations to be placed with the grievance 
documentation.    

E.  Fact Finding Process 

1.  The Fact Finder's goal is to determine impartially the facts of the case as 
simply and as directly as circumstances will allow and submit a report to 
the Deciding Official. Personal interviews and group meetings may be 
recorded by the Fact Finder for the purpose of preparing a summary.  

2.  The Chief of Employee Relations will appoint a Fact Finder (usually a 

FEMA supervisor or management official) who has not been involved in 
the issue being grieved and does not occupy a position subordinate to any 
official who recommended, advised, made a decision on, or otherwise is 
or was involved in the matter being grieved, unless that official is the 
Administrator of FEMA.   

3.  The Fact Finder will conduct an inquiry of a nature and scope appropriate 
to the issues involved in the grievance. The inquiry will be restricted to the 
issues raised in the written grievance and the personal relief requested.  
The grievant may not raise additional issues or revise the relief requested 
during the course of the grievance. The inquiry shall be conducted as 
informally as possible consistent with obtaining the facts. The inquiry may 
involve, but is not limited to, review and/or securing of documentary 

11 

 
 
evidence (relevant laws, Executive Orders, regulations, directives, 
manuals, instructions, guidance, etc.) and personal interviews or group 
meetings. Generally, the Fact Finder will meet with the grievant and/or 
grievant’s representative, listen to their presentation, and receive any 
additional documents offered. If a personal meeting and presentation is 
impractical, because of distance or other reasons, the Fact Finder may 
solicit information by other means.   

4.  Within 25 days of receiving the grievance, the Fact Finder shall:  

a.  Conduct an inquiry, if needed, to clarify the issue(s) and determine all 

facts relevant to the grievance. At his/her discretion, this inquiry usually 
consists of obtaining and summarizing relevant documentary evidence 
and conducting personal interviews and/or group meetings. However, 
the Fact Finder may submit questions in writing and request written 
replies, or use any other research or investigative techniques he or she 
deems necessary and appropriate. 

b.  Prepare and submit a Fact Finder’s Report to the Deciding Official and 
the grievant and representative, if any. This report will identify and 
summarize all facts relevant to the issue(s) of concern. 

5.  Upon written request to Employee Relations, the Fact Finder’s time-limit 
may be extended to accommodate unusual circumstances or deal with 
unusually complex issues. 

6.  Within 10 days after receiving a Fact Finder’s Report, the grievant or 

representative, if any, may submit comments on the report to the Deciding 
Official.   

12 

 
   
 
 
 
3-1.

  Cancellation of Grievances 

CHAPTER 3 - 

SPECIAL ISSUES 

The Chief of Employee Relations will cancel a grievance under any of the 
following circumstances: 

A.  At the grievant’s request. 

B.  Upon termination of the grievant’s employment with FEMA, unless the 

personal relief sought by the employee may be granted after termination of 
the employment.  

C.  Upon the death of the grievant, unless the grievance involves a question of 

pay. 

D.  For the grievant’s failure to furnish necessary information or comply with the 

grievance system timeframes and procedures. 

3-2.

  Allegations of Employment Discrimination 

If an allegation of unlawful discrimination is made in connection with a grievance, 
the allegation must be referred for processing in accordance with the Equal 
Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) regulation Title 29 C.F.R. Part 
1614. The grievance process will not address issues related to the allegation of 
discrimination, including unlawful employment discrimination, based on race, 
color, religion, sex, national origin, age, handicap, and reprisal. Employees 
covered by a collective bargaining agreement must follow the procedures within 
the agreement for processing discrimination complaints. 

3-3.

  Group Grievances 

A group of employees with a common complaint may present a grievance under 
the provisions of this policy. One person must be identified by the group as its 
representative so the grievance can be handled efficiently and expeditiously. If 
employees in the group have different supervisors, the Chief of Employee 
Relations may identify the supervisor or management official to whom the group 
representative first presents the grievance. Grievances submitted under the 
formal procedures, whether submitted by employees individually or as a group, 
may be considered by the same Deciding Official as a single package. 

3-4.

  Disallowance of a Grievant’s Choice of Representative 

A.  The Chief of Employee Relations may disallow a grievant’s choice of 

representative for any of the following reasons: 

1.  Priority Need of the Government. When a designated representative's 

supervisor believes the official time requested to serve as the grievant's 
representative will negatively impact the organization’s ability to: meet 
program goals in a significant way; provide required or emergency 
services; or meet critical project deadlines. 

2.  Conflict of Position. When a designated representative's supervisor 

believes the normal duties of the representative's position may require the 

13 

 
 
representative to review, recommend, prepare, or otherwise assist in the 
preparation of management's response to the grievance.  

3.  Conflict of Interest. When the grievant's supervisor believes the normal 
duties of the grievant's position may require the grievant to act for 
management in official dealings with the representative.  

4.  Unreasonable Cost to the Government. When the designated 

representative's supervisor believes authorization of official time would 
involve substantial travel costs or other related expenses. 

B.  Initiation of a Disallowance Action. A supervisor or manager in the line of 
supervision over the representative or grievant may submit a request for 
disallowance to the Chief of Employee Relations. This request will describe 
briefly the reason(s) for requesting disallowance. This request should be 
made promptly, but may be made at any time during the processing of a 
grievance. 

C.  Notification of Disallowance. The Chief of Employee Relations will notify the 
grievant in writing by sending a disallowance decision that clearly describes 
the reason(s) for disallowance. 

D.  Challenging a Disallowance Decision. The grievant may challenge a 

disallowance decision by sending an appeal to the Chief Component Human 
Capital Officer or designee, OCCHCO, within seven days after receiving the 
disallowance decision. The appeal will include the following: 

1.  A copy of the disallowance decision.  

2.  All reasons in support of reversing the disallowance decision. 

E.  Effect of a Disallowance on Grievance Processing. A disallowance decision 
suspends the time limit for seven days or until the grievant receives the final 
decision on a challenge. In addition, if the disallowance is sustained, the time 
limit is extended for up to seven more days so the grievant may obtain 
another representative. 

14 

 
 
FEMA MANUAL 252-11-1  
CADRE OF ON-CALL RESPONSE/RECOVERY EMPLOYEE (CORE) 
PROGRAM 
APPROVAL DATE: 08/25/2015 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 

FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY 

OFFICE OF THE CHIEF COMPONENT HUMAN CAPITAL OFFICER 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Foreword 

The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) intends to achieve business and 
management excellence by providing guidance and policy direction for the 
administration of FEMA’s Cadre of On-call Response/Recovery Employees (COREs). 
FEMA’s most valuable resource is its workforce; permanent and temporary employees 
who are focused on and committed to leading America to prepare for, prevent, respond 
to, and recover from all-hazards incidents. FEMA relies upon its temporary personnel, in 
particular, to carry out its role in incident management and support operations and to 
augment FEMA’s permanent workforce.   

The objective of the CORE Program is to attract and maintain a pool of highly skilled 
and motivated temporary personnel who are well trained and ready to respond and 
deliver quality and timely services to survivors and communities impacted by all-hazards 
incidents. The publication of this Manual will ensure consistent policy application and 
enable FEMA to better manage COREs in a cost effective and efficient manner, while 
offering the necessary incentives to recruit a professional incident workforce capable of 
assisting disaster survivors in their time of greatest need. 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 

Foreword ......................................................................................................................... 2 

CHAPTER 1: GENERAL INFORMATION ...................................................................... 7 

1-1.  Purpose ................................................................................................................ 7 

1-2.  Applicability and Scope ........................................................................................ 7 

1-3.  Authorities............................................................................................................. 7 

1-4.  References ........................................................................................................... 7 

1-5.  Policy .................................................................................................................... 9 

1-6.  Definitions ........................................................................................................... 10 

1-7.  Responsibilities ................................................................................................... 15 

1-8.  Reporting Requirement ...................................................................................... 24 

1-9.  Forms Prescribed ............................................................................................... 24 

1-10.  No Private Right ................................................................................................. 24 

1-11.  Questions ........................................................................................................... 24 

CHAPTER 2: RECRUITMENT AND HIRING ............................................................... 25 

2-1.  General ............................................................................................................... 25 

2-2.  Staffing Plans ..................................................................................................... 25 

2-3.  Annual Direct Charge CORE Certification .......................................................... 26 

2-4.  Procedures for Soliciting Candidates .................................................................. 27 

2-5.  Name Request .................................................................................................... 30 

2-6. 

Interviews ........................................................................................................... 30 

2-7.  Reference Checks .............................................................................................. 31 

2-8. 

Job Offers ........................................................................................................... 31 

2-9.  Notification to Applicants .................................................................................... 32 

2-10.  Recordkeeping Requirements ............................................................................ 32 

CHAPTER 3: APPOINTMENTS ................................................................................... 33 

3-1.  Eligibility for Appointment ................................................................................... 33 

3-2.  CORE Appointments .......................................................................................... 33 

3-3.  Conditions of Employment .................................................................................. 34 

3-4.  Directed Work Location ...................................................................................... 35 

3-5.  Oath of Office ..................................................................................................... 35 

3-6.  Government Property ......................................................................................... 35 

3 

 
 
3-7.  Reassignments to a New Position ...................................................................... 36 

3-8.  Detail Assignments ............................................................................................. 36 

3-9.  Reappointment Procedures ................................................................................ 37 

3-10.  Resignation......................................................................................................... 37 

CHAPTER 4: COMPENSATION PROVISIONS ........................................................... 38 

4-1.  Applicability......................................................................................................... 38 

4-2.  Establishment of CORE Pay Plan ...................................................................... 38 

4-3.  Conversion Actions ............................................................................................. 38 

4-4.  Position Management and Classification ............................................................ 38 

4-5.  Locality Pay ........................................................................................................ 38 

4-6.  Cost of Living Increase ....................................................................................... 39 

4-7.  Pay Ceilings and Premium Pay .......................................................................... 39 

4-8.  Recruitment, Relocation, or Retention Incentives ............................................... 39 

4-9.  Offset Provision for Civilian Retirees .................................................................. 41 

CHAPTER 5: COMPENSATION (PAY BANDS) .......................................................... 42 

5-1.  General ............................................................................................................... 42 

5-2.  Setting Basic Rate of Pay ................................................................................... 42 

5-3.  Pay Adjustments ................................................................................................. 43 

5-4.  Merit-Based Increase ......................................................................................... 43 

5-5.  Promotion ........................................................................................................... 44 

5-6.  Change to a Lower Pay Band ............................................................................. 44 

CHAPTER 6: COMPENSATION (GRADES AND STEPS) .......................................... 46 

6-1.  General ............................................................................................................... 46 

6-2.  Setting Basic Rate of Pay ................................................................................... 46 

6-3.  Pay Adjustments ................................................................................................. 47 

6-4.  Step Increases .................................................................................................... 48 

6-5.  Promotion ........................................................................................................... 49 

6-6.  Change to Lower Grade ..................................................................................... 49 

CHAPTER 7: BENEFITS .............................................................................................. 51 

7-1.  General ............................................................................................................... 51 

7-2.  Health Benefits ................................................................................................... 51 

7-3.  FEDVIP (Dental and Vision) Program ................................................................ 52 

7-4.  Life Insurance ..................................................................................................... 52 

4 

 
7-5.  Retirement .......................................................................................................... 52 

7-6.  Thrift Savings Plan ............................................................................................. 53 

7-7.  Federal Long-Term Care Insurance Program ..................................................... 53 

7-8.  Flexible Spending Accounts ............................................................................... 53 

7-9.  Employee Assistance Program (EAP) ................................................................ 53 

7-10.  Transit Subsidy Program .................................................................................... 53 

CHAPTER 8: PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT ......................................................... 55 

8-1.  General ............................................................................................................... 55 

8-2.  Performance Management for CORE-Is ............................................................. 55 

8-3.  Deployment Performance Management ............................................................. 55 

CHAPTER 9: AWARDS AND RECOGNITION ............................................................. 57 

9-1.  Awards and Recognition Program ...................................................................... 57 

CHAPTER 10: SCHEDULING OF WORK AND TELEWORK ...................................... 58 

10-1.  Scheduling of Work and Telework ...................................................................... 58 

CHAPTER 11: PROCEDURES FOR MISCONDUCT AND POOR PERFORMANCE .. 59 

11-1.  General ............................................................................................................... 59 

11-2.  Addressing Misconduct ...................................................................................... 59 

11-3.  Addressing Poor Performance ............................................................................ 62 

11-4.  Deployment Scenarios ....................................................................................... 64 

11-5.  Arrest, Indictment, and other Allegations of Misconduct ..................................... 64 

11-6.  The Appeal Process ........................................................................................... 66 

11-7.  Allegations of Discrimination............................................................................... 66 

11-8.  Allegations of Fraud, Waste, Abuse, and Mismanagement ................................ 66 

CHAPTER 12: RIGHTSIZING ....................................................................................... 67 

12-1.  General ............................................................................................................... 67 

12-2.  Rightsizing Plan .................................................................................................. 67 

12-3.  Notice ................................................................................................................. 68 

12-4.  Retention Criteria ................................................................................................ 68 

12-5.  Transitional Options for Released COREs ......................................................... 70 

CHAPTER 13: ABSENCE AND LEAVE ....................................................................... 71 

13-1.  Absence and Leave Policy ................................................................................. 71 

CHAPTER 14: TRAINING AND ETHICS ...................................................................... 72 

14-1.  Training Provisions ............................................................................................. 72 

5 

 
14-2.  Ethics Requirements .......................................................................................... 72 

CHAPTER 15: CONTINUING SERVICE AGREEMENTS ............................................ 74 

15-1.  Service Agreement ............................................................................................. 74 

15-2.  Terminations of a CSA ....................................................................................... 74 

15-3.  Debt Recovery .................................................................................................... 74 

6 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1:  GENERAL INFORMATION 

1-1.  Purpose 

This Manual establishes the policies and procedures for FEMA’s Cadre of On-
call Response/Recovery Employees (CORE) Program. FEMA will achieve 
consistency and facilitate the equitable and effective management of all COREs 
through the implementation of the policies and procedures set forth in this 
Manual. 

1-2.  Applicability and Scope 

A.  The provisions of this Manual apply to all FEMA COREs, unless otherwise 

indicated. 

B.  FD 010-7, Incident Management Assistance Team (IMAT) Program Directive 
(IMAT Directive), is applicable to COREs who receive CORE-I appointments, 
also known as CORE-Incident Management Assistance Team (IMAT) 
Members or Pilot IMATs. Inconsistencies between this Manual and the IMAT 
Directive are resolved in favor of the IMAT Directive. 

C.  The Attorney Hiring and Promotion Plan (AHPP), dated April 21, 2014, 
provides pay setting, pay adjustments, and promotion policy for CORE 
Attorneys. Inconsistencies between this Manual and the AHPP are resolved 
in favor of the AHPP. 

1-3.  Authorities 

Section 306 of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance 
Act, Pub. L. No. 93-288, as amended (Stafford Act), codified at 42 U.S.C. §§ 
5121 et seq., provides FEMA with authority “to appoint and fix the compensation 
of such temporary personnel as may be necessary, without regard to the 
provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the 
competitive service.”  

1-4.  References 

The following list is not an exhaustive list of statutes, regulations, DHS and 
FEMA directives and manuals, policies, and guidance memorandums applicable 
to COREs. 

A.  FEMA Policy 401-123-1, Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) Policy 

Statement, October 1, 2014.  

B.  Memorandum from the DHS Chief Human Capital Officer, Annual Leave 

Enhancements, February 17, 2006. 

C.  DHS Instruction 121-01-007, DHS Personnel Suitability and Security 

Program, June 2009. 

D.  DHS Management Directive 254-02, Employee Assistance Program, May 31, 

2007. 

7 

 
 
 
 
E.  DHS Management Directive 0810.1, The Office of Inspector General, June 

10, 2004. 

F.  DHS Management Directive 3120.2, Employment of Non-Citizens, March 22, 

2004. 

G.  Memorandum from the Deputy Administrator, Every Employee an Emergency 

Manager—Action Items, January 20, 2012.  

H.  FEMA Directive (FD) 010-7, Incident Management Assistance Team (IMAT) 

Program Directive, January 12, 2015. 

I.  FEMA Directive 010-9, FEMA Incident Workforce Cadre Management, June 

9, 2015. 

J.  FEMA Directive 122-1, International Travel, October 24, 2011. 

K.  FEMA Directive 122-2, Local Travel Reimbursement, March 12, 2013. 

L.  FEMA Directive 122-4, Payment of Official Travel Expenses from a Non-

Federal Source, June 27, 2013. 

M.  FEMA Directive 122-7, Premium Class Travel, September 19, 2013. 

N.  FEMA Directive 122-8, Invitational Travel, February 7, 2014. 

O.  FEMA Directive 122-9, Travel Charge Card, April 18, 2014. 

P.  FEMA Directive 119-6, Employee Physical Fitness Program, February 2, 

2012. 

Q.  FEMA Directive 141-1, Records Management Program Directive, March 6, 

2014. 

R.  FEMA Manual (FM) 106-1-1, Scheduling of Work, March 5, 2014. 

S.  FEMA Manual 123-9-1, Telework, January 9, 2013. 

T.  FEMA Manual 123-20-1, Drug-Free Workplace Program, July 28, 2014. 

U.  FEMA Manual 253-2-1, Premium Pay, February 11, 2014. 

V.  FEMA Manual 255-1-1, FEMA Employee Performance Management Program 

(EPMP), February 21, 2013. 

W. FEMA Manual 255-4-1, Employee Awards and Recognition, September 26, 

2013. 

X.  FEMA Manual 109-2-1, Privacy Program, June 4, 2013. 

Y.  FEMA Manual 3300.3, FEMA Absence and Leave Policy, July 31, 2001. 

Z.  FEMA Manual 6200.1, Travel Regulations, November 25, 1988. 

AA. Memorandum from the FEMA Chief Counsel, Appointment and 

Compensation of Stafford Act Employees Under Section 306(b)(1) of the 
Stafford Act, June 25, 2012. 

BB. Attorney Hiring and Promotion Plan, April 21, 2014. 

8 

 
CC.FEMA Interview and Selection Guidance, June 4, 2014. 

DD.FEMA Budget Guidance on use of DRF/DRS resources, March 2015. 

1-5.  Policy 

A.  The authority provided by the Stafford Act allows FEMA to manage its CORE 
Program without being required to apply all of the provisions of Title 5, United 
States Code, and its implementing regulations. FEMA chooses, as a matter of 
policy, to administratively implement some Title 5 provisions and, in other 
circumstances, to use its Stafford Act authority to create and administer its 
own policies to more effectively manage Stafford Act employees consistent 
with the intent and program needs for these positions. In all circumstances, 
FEMA intends to develop and implement policies that are fair and equitable to 
its CORE workforce and that are consistently understood and implemented by 
FEMA managers and supervisors. 

B.  COREs are hired to directly support the response and recovery efforts related 

to disasters and are funded out of the Disaster Relief Fund (DRF). As 
temporary employees, COREs cannot replace the work performed and 
funded through annual appropriations by permanent full-time staff. COREs 
can perform Stafford Act duties that are not otherwise funded in FEMA’s 
budget and can be charged to an open disaster. The use of COREs must be 
reviewed and validated on a recurring basis to ensure a continued need for 
the positions and consistent funding decisions across FEMA. 

C.  FEMA shall: 

1.  Staff positions with the best qualified persons available; 

2.  Develop and use COREs to the maximum extent possible consistent with 

the completion of FEMA’s mission and the Stafford Act; 

3.  Establish CORE positions with a minimum of two-year appointments 
(unless otherwise justified for less than two years based on workload 
analyses) based on requests from Offices and Directorates authorized to 
fill CORE positions. Offices and Directorates will request the renewal of a 
CORE’s appointment prior to the CORE’s expiration date, subject to 
funding (see section 3-9); 

4.  Require COREs to sign a Conditions of Employment letter at the time of 

hiring and reappointment; 

5.  Ensure that all personnel actions are taken without regard to political, 

religious, or labor organization affiliation or non-affiliation, marital or family 
status, race, color, gender, sexual orientation, national origin, disability, 
genetic information, age, or prior Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) 
activity; without regard to criteria unrelated to the position, such as 
personal friendship or patronage, and that selections are based solely on 
job-related criteria; and do not fall within prohibited personnel practices 
identified at 5 U.S.C. § 2302(b);  

9 

 
 
6.  Establish a pay system that will improve the ability of FEMA to attract and 

retain quality candidates and employees; 

7.  Ensure that equal pay is provided for work of equal value, with appropriate 
consideration of both national and local pay rates paid by employers in the 
private sector, and that appropriate incentives and recognition should be 
provided for excellence in performance; and 

8.  Provide effective education and training, consistent with Stafford Act 
duties, which will result in enhanced organizational and individual 
performance. 

D.  COREs must: 

1.  Maintain high standards of integrity, conduct, and concern for the public 

interest; and 

2.  Be prepared at all times to deploy or work from alternate work locations 

other than their normal official duty station. 

E.  COREs may be terminated at any time, with cause (poor performance or 

misconduct), or without cause (such as when workload or funding diminishes 
or ends). 

F.  A CORE may be subject to removal if the CORE declines a deployment 

request without reasonable cause. 

1-6.  Definitions 

A.  Algorithm. A formula for allocating a CORE’s salary and benefits across 

multiple disaster declarations. The allocation should correlate to the estimated 
amount of time the CORE performs work attributable to each declaration. 

B.  Annual Direct Charge CORE Certification. The annual process for verification 
of Disaster Relief Fund (DRF) related duties and the continued need for all 
CORE positions.   

C.  Appointment. A personnel action that results in an individual becoming a 
FEMA employee. Individuals, who accept CORE positions, are given 
excepted service appointments with FEMA under the Stafford Act. Generally, 
appointments may not be effective prior to the date of approval by the 
appointing official and are only effective from the date of acceptance of the 
offer of employment and entrance on duty, unless a later date is stated on the 
SF-52, or other approving document. 

D.  Ancillary Support. Personnel directly supporting disaster operations from their 

daily duty station. 

E.  Backfill. Hiring an employee to fill a previously approved vacant funded 

position. 

F.  Basic pay. The rate of pay fixed by administrative action for the position held 
before any deductions, but exclusive of additional pay of any other kind, 
including premium pay. 

10 

 
 
G.  Career path. A progression of positions in one or more occupational series 

leading to an increase in responsibility and proficiency. 

H.  Confidential Financial Disclosure (OGE Form 450) Filer. A CORE who, 

because of the duties of his or her assigned position, must file confidential 
financial disclosure reports (OGE Form 450s) as directed by the Office of 
Government Ethics and FEMA’s Office of the Chief Counsel pursuant to 5 
C.F.R. § 2634 Subpart I. COREs in these positions are assigned FEMA 
duties that involve the exercise of significant discretion in certain sensitive 
areas. OGE Form 450 disclosures serve to ensure confidence in the integrity 
of FEMA operations by identifying and preventing potential conflicts of 
interest. If a CORE’s position description indicates duties requiring a 
confidential financial disclosure, timely filing of OGE Form 450 is a condition 
of employment. 

I.  Continuing Service Agreement (CSA). A written agreement between FEMA 

and a CORE under which the CORE agrees to a specified period of 
employment with FEMA in return for a monetary incentive or participation in a 
training or developmental program. 

J.  Conversion Action. The process by which a non-CORE FEMA employee is 

appointed to a CORE position.  

K.  CORE-I (IMAT CORE). A CORE assigned full-time to an IMAT and to an 

IMAT position description. CORE-Is receive four-year appointments and are 
the first FEMA personnel deployed to an incident, serving in leadership roles 
as part of an IMAT. When not deployed, IMAT CORE base salaries are paid 
from the Disaster Readiness and Support (DRS) account; however, when 
deployed their salaries are paid by the disaster (under the declaration). IMAT 
COREs are non-direct charge COREs and new, backfill, or reassignment 
actions are not subject to direct charge CORE requirements. 

L.  Declaration. Declarations for DRF-funded events, including major disasters, 

emergencies, fire management declarations, and disasters under the 
Compact of Free Association. 

M.  Demotion. A change to a lower grade or pay band and a decrease in pay as a 

result of an adverse action or poor performance.  

N.  Direct Charge CORE. Employees whose primary duty is to carry out Stafford 

Act functions in support of open, active declarations or pre-event surge 
activities to an event for which a declaration is reasonably likely and 
imminent. The salary of a Direct Charge CORE is charged to Major Disasters, 
Emergencies, Fire Management Assistance Grants or the Disaster Surge 
account. Direct Charge COREs working on specific events should charge 
their time directly to those events. Direct Charge COREs working on multiple 
events or working as a part of a distributed group defined below should 
charge their time to an algorithm that accurately reflects the amount of work 
performed for each of those events. Specifically, the salary of a Direct Charge 
CORE may be structured in one of the following ways: 

11 

 
1.  Specific Declaration: Salary is based on work performed on a single, 

specific declaration.  

2.  Multiple Declarations: Salary is based on work that provides services to 
multiple declarations and is charged based on an established algorithm.  

3.  Distributed Group Activities: Activities comprised of non-segregable 

declaration and non-declaration related functions that will be performed 
collectively by COREs and non-COREs. The number of COREs carrying 
out a particular Distributed Group Activity is based on the percentage of 
time required for the disaster related functions of that Distributed Group 
Activity. Charges are allocated across multiple disasters based on an 
established algorithm for the Distributed Group Activity.1  

Duties related to preparedness, readiness, and planning for future events are 
not allowable Direct Charge CORE duties. Charging a CORE’s salary to 
declarations when the duties performed by the CORE do not support those 
declarations could result in a violation of the Anti-Deficiency Act (ADA) and 
result in adverse actions against the responsible officials. 

O.  Distributed Group Activity Baseline. The ratio of COREs and non-COREs 
carrying out a particular Distributed Group Activity as determined by the 
percentage declaration and non-declaration functions performed for that 
Activity based on verifiable workload data and evaluation of current or past 
budget justification materials. 

P.  FEMA Qualification System (FQS). A performance-based system for 

certifying FEMA employees as “Qualified” or “Trainee” in IM and IS positions; 
certification is based on successful completion of required experience, 
required training, and demonstrated performance (see FEMA Directive 010-9, 
Incident Workforce Cadre Management, dated June 9, 2014). 

Q.  Fitness Determination. “Fitness” means “the level of character and conduct 
determined for an individual to perform work for or on behalf of a Federal 
agency as an employee in the excepted service (other than a position subject 
to suitability) or as a contractor employee.” Executive Order 13,488, § 2(d); 
implemented in DHS Instruction 121-01-007, Chapter 3. 

R.  IM CORE. A CORE assigned to a two-year appointment and whose primary 
job duty is to perform an FQS incident management position. When not 
deployed, IM CORE base salaries are paid from the Disaster Readiness and 
Support (DRS) account; however, when deployed their salaries are paid by 
the disaster (under the declaration). IM COREs are non-direct charge COREs 

1 For example, OCFO’s FEMA Finance Center has a Distributed Group Activity that processes and pays invoices 
related to both disaster and non-disaster activities. Determining the number of CORE positions that should populate 
this Distributed Group Activity requires an analysis of the ratio of disaster functions versus non-disaster functions. If 
the analysis concludes that 70% of the functions are disaster related and the entire Distributed Group Activity 
requires 10 positions, then the analysis would justify 7 CORE positions out of the 10 needed to perform those 
functions. 

12 

 
                                                           
and new, backfill, or reassignment actions are not subject to direct charge 
CORE requirements 

S.  Incident Management (IM). The incident-level operation of the Federal role in 
emergency response, recovery, logistics, and mitigation. Responsibilities 
include the direct control and employment of resources, management of 
incident offices, operations, and delivery of Federal assistance through all 
phases of response and recovery. 

T.  Incident Support (IS). The coordination of all Federal resources that support 
emergency response, recovery, logistics, and mitigation. Responsibilities 
include the deployment of national-level assets, support of national objectives 
and programs affected during the disaster, and support of incident operations 
with resources, expertise, information, and guidance. 

U.  Locality Payment. A locality-based comparability payment (see 5 U.S.C. § 

5304 and 5 C.F.R. Part 531, subpart F). 

V.  Mission Essential. Personnel who perform a limited set of FEMA functions 
that must be continued throughout, or resumed rapidly after, a disruption of 
normal activities. 

W. Non-Direct Charge CORE. COREs whose salaries are partially or wholly 
funded by the DRS account within the DRF. These employees’ functions 
support operational readiness, response, and recovery functions of the 
Stafford Act that are not directly attributable to the response and recovery 
efforts of any specific declaration or pre-event surge activities to an event for 
which a declaration is reasonably likely and imminent. Examples of Non-
Direct Charge COREs include IM and IMAT COREs when not deployed or 
working for an open disaster.  

X.  Offices and Directorates. Office of the Administrator, Office of Chief Counsel, 
Office of the Chief Financial Officer, Office of External Affairs, Office of Policy 
and Program Analysis, Office of Response and Recovery, Response 
Directorate, Recovery Directorate, Logistics Management Directorate, 
Protection and National Preparedness, National Preparedness Directorate, 
National Continuity Programs Directorate, Grant Programs Directorate, 
Mission Support, Office of the Chief Administrative Officer, Office of the Chief 
Component Human Capital Officer, Office of the Chief Information Officer, 
Office of the Chief Procurement Officer, Office of the Chief Security Officer, 
Federal Insurance and Mitigation Administration, FIA Mitigation, FIA 
Insurance, United States Fire Administration, and Offices of Regional 
Administrators. 

Y.  Pay Adjustment. Any increase or decrease in a CORE’s basic pay when there 
is no change in the duties or responsibilities of the CORE’s position within the 
same career path and pay plan (see sections 5-3 and 6-3). 

Z.  Pay Band. A range of pay for a group or categories of employees that FEMA 

established according to FEMA’s Stafford Act authority. 

13 

 
AA. Permanent Full-Time (PFT). A permanent FEMA employees who meets the 

definition of “employee” under 5 U.S.C. § 2105. 

BB. Post-Action Review. An internal control established to ensure compliance 

with the Annual Direct Charge CORE Certification review and documentation 
requirements established for Direct Charge CORE positions.   

CC.Program Area. A discrete subdivision within an Office, Division, Branch, or 

Unit that performs work that is substantially different from the work performed 
by other subdivisions. 

DD.Promotion. A personnel action that moves a CORE (1) to a higher grade; (2) 
from one pay band to a higher pay band in the same career path; or (3) to a 
position in another career path in combination with an increase in the CORE’s 
basic pay. 

EE. Qualifying Life Event (QLE). OPM designated events deemed acceptable to 
the IRS that may allow premium conversion participants to change their 
participation election for premium conversion outside of an open season. For 
more information, see OPM’s Healthcare Reference Materials for a listing of 
the authorized Qualifying Life Events. 

FF.Reassignment. A personnel action that moves a CORE from one position to 
another without promotion or change to a lower pay band, grade, or step, at 
management discretion and based on necessary approvals. Reassignment 
includes: (1) movement to a position in a new occupational series, or to 
another position in the same series; (2) assignment to a position that has 
been reclassified due to the introduction of a new or revised classification or 
job grading standard; (3) assignment to a position that has been reclassified 
as a result of a position review; and (4) movement to a different position at the 
same band but with a change in salary that is the result of a different locality 
payment. 

GG. Relative. A father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, first 

cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife, unmarried domestic partner, father-in-
law, mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, 
stepfather, stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half-
brother, or half-sister. The definition of “relative” for sick leave, Family Medical 
Leave Act (FMLA), and other leave purposes may be different; for more 
information see FEMA Manual 3300.3, Absence and Leave. 

HH.Rightsizing. The process by which FEMA reduces CORE staff levels in 

response to changed conditions such as a diminished workload, or budgetary 
or statutory changes. 

II.  Selecting Official. A FEMA employee who is authorized to make a hiring 

decision. 

JJ. Specialized Experience Statement. A written description of any specialized 

experience that a candidate must possess in order to be considered minimally 
qualified for the vacancy. Any candidate who does not meet the specialized 

14 

 
experience requirements will not be referred to Office or Directorate by 
OCCHCO.  

KK. Supervisor. An employee who accomplishes work through the direction of 
other people. A supervisor must spend at least 25 percent of their time 
exercising independent judgment over other employees on matters relating 
to, but not limited to, work assignments, performance management, 
administration, training, and property accountability. 

LL. Supervisor of Record. The supervisor of record has the delegated authority to 
assign work, discipline, and remove a CORE from federal employment in 
accordance with the procedures found in Chapter 11 (discipline) and Chapter 
8 (performance management).  

MM. Temporary Duty Supervisor. The individual (PFT, CORE, or Reservist) on-
site or in virtual communication with deployed PFTs, COREs, or Reservists 
and authorized to exercise independent judgment to assign work. The 
temporary duty supervisor is not authorized to take personnel actions against 
a CORE under his or her functional authority, unless the temporary supervisor 
is also the supervisor of record. 

1-7.  Responsibilities 

A.  FEMA Administrator or Deputy Administrator is responsible for: 

1.  Approving details of COREs to perform non-Stafford Act activities; and 

2.  Approving written recommendations for pay of recruitment, relocation, and 
retention incentives that are greater than 25% of a CORE’s base pay and, 
if approved, forwarding concurrence to the head of the requesting Office 
or Directorate and to OCCHCO. 

B.  Associate Administrators, Headquarters’ Office Chiefs Reporting Directly to 

the Administrator, and Regional Administrators are responsible for: 

1.  Reviewing and approving the creation or renewal of Direct Charge CORE 
positions, confirming funding, and forwarding to OCCHCO for requisite 
personnel processing actions; 

2.  Conducting an annual certification of Direct Charge CORE positions 

approved by authorized officials based on required supporting 
documentation and any follow-up, including referrals to the Office of Chief 
Counsel (OCC) or appropriate offices for further action (see section 2-3); 

3.  Ensuring that all personnel involved in the hiring of COREs are familiar 
with the appropriate legal use of CORE positions, the funding factors 
involved in the hiring process, and comply with all legal and budgetary 
requirements; 

4.  Ensuring all baselines are established and validated on a recurring basis 

for Distributed Group Activity Direct Charge COREs and all new baselines 
or baseline changes are approved by OCFO; 

15 

 
 
5.  Certifying that all Direct Charge COREs are carrying out only DRF-related 

duties performed on open, active disasters; 

6.  Providing timely, supporting documentation to OCFO and any oversight 

organization to complete post-action reviews (see section 2-3); 

7.  Reviewing requests for recruitment, relocation, or retention incentives that 
require approval by the Administrator and, if in concurrence, sending the 
request to OCCHCO, OCFO, and the Administrator for approval; and 

8.  Reviewing requests for recruitment, relocation, or retention incentive 

repayment waivers and, if in concurrence, transmitting to OCCHCO for 
review.  

C.  Assistant Administrators, Deputy Associate Administrators, and Office 

Directors Not Reporting Directly to the Administrator are responsible for: 

1.  Requesting to advance a CORE’s initial rate of pay to step five or greater 

of the grade; 

2.  Reviewing requests for recruitment, relocation, or retention incentive 

repayment waivers that do not require approval by the Administrator and, 
if in concurrence, transmitting to OCCHCO and OCFO for review and 
approval; and 

3.  Ensuring all CORE hiring actions submitted for higher level approval meet 

the standards promulgated herein. 

D.  Headquarters Office or Directorate Chiefs or Regional Administrators are 

responsible for: 

1.  Approving the reassignment of a CORE based on workload needs and 

subject to funding; 

2.  Conducting workload analyses to justify the need for new or continued use 

of CORE positions; 

3.  Submitting staffing plans to OCCHCO with the requested number of 

CORE positions by title, series, grade, and duty station for OCCHCO’s 
approval which should also support Disaster Spend Plans required by 
OCFO; 

4.  Coordinating with OCCHCO to announce and hire CORE positions; 

5.  Renewing CORE appointments based on workload needs and subject to 

funding; 

6.  Approving recruitment, relocation, or retention incentives that do not need 

Administrator approval; and 

7.  Approving Functional Area SMEs in the event of a rightsizing. 

E.  Office of Chief Counsel (OCC) is responsible for: 

1.  Reviewing and advising on legal sufficiency of FEMA matters to include: 

spending legislation, fiscal policy and potential ADA violations;  

16 

 
2.  Providing guidance, as necessary, regarding the appropriate use of the 

Disaster Relief Fund to charge CORE salaries; 

3.  Supporting OCFO and OCCHO in conducting the Annual Post-Action 

Review of direct charge COREs; 

4.  Reviewing and approving the use of COREs for limited non-Stafford Act 

activities in furtherance of FEMA’s mission; 

5.  Providing all COREs entering Federal service with an Initial Ethics 

Orientation as required by 5 C.F.R. § 2638.703; 

6.  Identifying all COREs that need to be designated as Confidential Financial 
Disclosure filers who must complete annual ethics training as required by 
5 C.F.R. § 2638.705, and auditing the content of said training for 
compliance with 5 C.F.R. § 2638.704; 

7.  Notifying all COREs of the requirement to file a new entrant report within 
30 days of assuming a position designated as requiring a Confidential 
Financial Disclosure Report per 5 C.F.R. § 2634.903(b); 

8.  Notifying all COREs designated as Confidential Financial Disclosure filers 

to file annual reports as required by 5 C.F.R. § 2634.903(a); 

9.  Reviewing Confidential Financial Disclosure reports, and providing 
advisory opinions to COREs, as appropriate, with regard to real or 
apparent conflicts of interest identified in the CORE’s financial disclosure 
report; 

10. Designating ethics attorneys to provide ethics advice to COREs; 

11. Providing legal review of performance and disciplinary actions; and 

12. Providing legal advice on policy development and implementation. 

F.  Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO) is responsible for: 

1.  Managing use and oversight of the DRF; 

2.  Ensuring the establishment of internal controls designed to prevent and 
detect non-compliance with applicable laws, standards, and accounting 
principles; 

3.  Reviewing and approving initial baseline and subsequent baseline 

adjustments for “distributed group” CORE positions; 

4.  Working with OCC and OCCHCO on the Annual Post-Action Review of 

direct charge COREs; 

5.  Conducting periodic audits and annual certifications of Direct Charge 
CORE positions and post-action reviews to validate and verify that all 
Direct Charge CORE duties are DRF-related and the appropriate 
approvals and documentation are evident, and taking action as 
appropriate on potential ADA violations; 

17 

 
6.  Referring instances that cannot be validated or verified as DRF-related 

duties to OCC or appropriate offices for further action;  

7.  Determining whether funding exists for each recruitment, relocation, or 

retention incentive request; and 

8.  Establishing an annual awards cap for COREs subject to funding. 

G.  Associate Administrator for Mission Support is responsible for reviewing all 

workload analysis disputes between the head of an Office or Directorate and 
OCCHCO and issuing a final decision. 

H.  Associate Administrator for Response and Recovery is responsible for 

deciding appeals from an FCO decision on whether to demobilize a CORE 
due to misconduct. 

I.  Office of the Chief Administrative Officer (OCAO) is responsible for: 

1.  Maintaining responsibility for the management and oversight of all 

Government-owned personal property within FEMA and for enforcing all 
applicable statutes, rules, regulations, and official guidance relating to 
Government-owned personal property; and 

2.  Administering the transit subsidy program. 

J.  Office of the Chief Component Human Capital Officer (OCCHCO) is 

responsible for: 

1.  Approving and administering all human capital programs and policies to 

include appointment and compensation programs; 

2.  Providing timely information to COREs regarding available benefit options, 
election periods, and technical direction on how to apply for available 
benefit options; 

3.  Making final decisions on all pay setting and requests for adjustments for 

CORE pay; 

4.  In consultation with the requesting Office or Directorate, approving 

workload analyses and staffing plans submitted by an Office or Directorate 
to justify CORE positions; 

5.  Providing Offices and Directorates with a list of COREs and their not-to-

exceed expiration dates who are assigned to the Office or Directorate on a 
biweekly basis; 

6.  In consultation with the requesting Office or Directorate, revalidating the 
request based on position management for a CORE position prior to the 
expiration of the position when an Office or Directorate requests a renewal 
of a CORE position; 

7.  Providing support for post-action reviews and the annual certifications, as 

well as supporting OCFO in execution of its responsibilities; 

18 

 
8.  Approving and administering the recruitment, appointment, placement, 

and separation of COREs, including setting the length of the appointment 
term; 

9.  Providing advice, guidance, training, and direct support to temporary duty 

supervisors and supervisors of record regarding how to properly document 
and address performance and misconduct;  

10. Coordinating affirmative employment programs with the Office of Equal 

Rights; 

11. Establishing and maintaining personnel records; 

12. Assuming responsibility for all EAP operations within FEMA; 

13. Administering the performance management and awards and recognition 

programs; 

14. Through the Human Resources cadre, ensuring that any demobilized 
CORE who has been deployed for at least 20 days has been issued a 
performance evaluation prior to departing the incident work site; 

15. Coordinating with OCC Ethics and supervisors of record to properly 
designate positions as Confidential Financial Disclosure filers and 
providing OCC Ethics with monthly reports identifying when a CORE has 
been appointed to or is no longer serving in a position designated as a 
Confidential Financial Disclosure filer; 

16. Providing technical guidance to Offices and Directorates in the planning of 

rightsizing procedures and approving the execution of rightsizing 
procedures; 

17. Providing direct support to COREs with respect to individual issues 

requiring action in connection with the administration of pay, benefits, and 
other personnel matters; 

18. Reviewing and approving requests for recruitment, relocation, or retention  

incentives;  

19. Administering FEMA’s Drug-Free Workplace program; and 

20. Providing information to managers and supervisors regarding the 

procedures for performance and disciplinary actions, recommendations for 
disposition in each case; and any relevant appeal process. 

K.  Office of the Chief Security Officer (OCSO) is responsible for: 

1.  Using standardized policies and procedures for verifying applicants’ 

personal identity; 

2.  Determining the fitness of applicants and COREs by conducting 

background checks; and 

3.  Authorizing facility access and issuing identification badges for COREs in 

a manner that ensures nationwide consistency across the CORE program.   

19 

 
L.  Division Chiefs are responsible for reviewing and providing a final decision on 

any hire via name request within their area of responsibility. 

M.  Second Level Supervisors are responsible for: 

1.  Overseeing the use of COREs consistent with the requirements 

established herein; 

2.  Requesting to advance a CORE’s basic rate of pay to step two, three, or 
four of the grade in conjunction with the CORE’s supervisor of record; 

3.  In coordination with OCCHCO, reviewing and issuing final decisions on 

disciplinary action appeals; 

4.  In coordination with OCCHCO, reviewing and issuing final decisions on all 

actions to terminate a CORE’s position for lack of FEMA need; 

5.  Reviewing and providing a final decision on all requests for merit-based 
increases, step increases, and to set pay for a new hire above the 
minimum rate for the position; and 

6.  Developing a Rightsizing Plan. 

N.  Federal Coordinating Officers (FCO) are responsible for deciding to 

demobilize a CORE due to misconduct. 

O.  Cadre Coordinators are responsible for: 

1.  Establishing and implementing individual performance goals on an annual 

basis for each position in the cadre, utilizing the position-specific 
behaviors found in the position’s PTB or any other sources approved by 
OCCHCO, and consulting with employees with Incident Management 
Titles in the cadre on the substance of the performance goals insofar as 
practical; and 

2.  Receiving and reviewing completed evaluations for their cadre personnel. 

Completed evaluations will be archived for each employee. 

P.  Selecting Officials are responsible for:  

1.  Recruiting and selecting COREs in accordance with this Manual, 

transmitting any request for hire via name request to his or her program 
area’s Division Chief (or higher) for review; and 

2.  Documenting the reasons for the selection of any CORE, and ensuring 
that all relevant records documenting such reasons are transmitted to 
OCCHCO for retention, including all interview notes. 

Q.  Supervisors of Record are responsible for: 

1.  Ensuring COREs are used for authorized purposes as outlined herein; 

2.  Providing day-to-day supervision of the performance and conduct of 

COREs under their supervision; 

3.  Assigning and evaluating work performed by a CORE when a CORE is 

not deployed; 

20 

 
4.  Requesting to renew appointments based on a workload analyses and 

staffing plan, subject to funding; 

5.  Requesting pay adjustments, conversion actions, and pay settings when a 

CORE voluntarily requests a change to a lower pay band or rate; 

6.  Requesting to advance a CORE’s basic rate of pay to step two, three, or 
four of the grade in conjunction with the CORE’s second level supervisor; 

7.  Initiating all recommendations for merit-based pay and step increases; 

8.  Establish performance and development plans, and evaluating employee 

performance in accordance with FEMA Manual 255-1-1; 

9.  Recommending performance awards consistent with FEMA guidelines; 

10. Retaining performance appraisals and all other documents related to the 

performance and/or conduct of COREs under their direct supervision, for a 
duration to be determined by FD 141-1, FEMA Records Management 
Program and relevant Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
(EEOC) regulations, if applicable; 

11. Submitting all requests for recruitment, relocation, or retention incentives  

to the head of their Office or Directorate for approval; 

12. Communicating proper conduct and performance standards to COREs 

consistent with FEMA policy; 

13. Receiving all deployment evaluations for COREs under their direct 

supervision and completing applicable progress reviews and annual 
performance ratings, considering as appropriate any deployment 
evaluations provided to the CORE by the temporary duty supervisor while 
deployed; 

14. Coordinating with OCC Ethics and OCCHCO to properly designate 

positions as Confidential Financial Disclosure Filers, and ensure that 
COREs complete required new entrant and annual ethics training 
requirements; 

15. Approving a CORE’s work schedule, telework schedule (if requested), and 

time and attendance records; 

16. Monitoring a CORE’s performance while teleworking in accordance with 

FM 123-9-1; 

17. Coordinating with COREs under their supervision to identify any real or 

apparent conflicts of interest or other standards of conduct issues prior to 
deployment, raising any such issues to the appropriate ethics counselor 
and, if applicable, mitigating any of these issues in accordance with 
recommendations from the ethics counselor and the temporary duty 
supervisor; 

18. Providing performance feedback and mentoring to maximize the success 

of a CORE in achieving performance goals and objectives; 

21 

 
19. Coordinating with OCCHCO’s Employee Relations Specialists to 

document incidents of poor performance and misconduct as they occur, 
and following up with the CORE to ensure that he or she understands the 
seriousness of his or her performance deficiencies or misconduct; 

20. Initiating personnel actions against COREs, to include discipline or 
removal for misconduct or poor performance after consulting with 
OCCHCO, and ensuring that any such actions are consistent with Merit 
Systems and EEO principles; 

21. In coordination with OCCHCO, documenting the reasons for all other 

personnel actions, including assignments, reassignments, promotions, 
demobilizations, rightsizing, and non-renewal of CORE appointments, and 
ensuring that such documentation is forwarded to OCCHCO along with 
any request or recommendation for personnel action; 

22. Collecting all government equipment prior to the effective date of a 

CORE’s removal or resignation; 

23. Overseeing and managing the resignation process when a CORE submits 
a resignation notification and forwarding all documentation to OCCHCO 
for processing; 

24. In coordination with OCCHCO, adopting the rightsizing procedures 

provided in this Manual; and 

25. Ensuring the professional development for COREs under their 

supervision. 

R.  Temporary Duty Supervisors are responsible for: 

1.  Ensuring COREs are used for authorized purposes as outlined herein; 

2.  Providing day-to-day supervision of the performance and conduct of 

deployed COREs; 

3.  Communicating proper conduct and performance standards to deployed 

COREs, included but not limited to, the basis for a deployment 
performance evaluation consistent with FEMA policy; 

4.  Completing performance evaluations for all COREs under their functional 

authority who are deployed for at least 20 days, and transmitting 
performance evaluation records to the CORE’s supervisor of record within 
30 days of the date of the demobilization; and 

5.  Advising the CORE and consulting with OCCHCO regarding issues of 
CORE misconduct and poor performance and referring allegations of 
misconduct to the CORE’s supervisor of record for review and 
coordination with OCCHCO prior to initiating disciplinary action.    

S.  COREs are responsible for the following, including, but not limited to: 

1.  Performing assigned duties and responsibilities acceptably; 

22 

 
2.  Conducting themselves in a manner that will bring credit to FEMA and 

supervisors directing their work, and observing the spirit and letter of the 
laws and regulations which govern the conduct of COREs; 

3.  Signing and complying with the terms and conditions of their appointments 
(including any conditions relating to receiving a security clearance), and 
other applicable FEMA directives; 

4.  Working at a Directed Work Location if directed by a supervisor or other 

properly designated FEMA official; 

5.  Reviewing benefit options and making selections within prescribed 

election periods; 

6.  Properly using, caring for, and protecting any assigned government 

property issued to them by FEMA. 

7.  Completing and signing a Self Certification of Health and Safety Checklist 
prior to beginning work, if the CORE’s home is his or her official duty 
station; 

8.  Following FEMA’s Absence and Leave and Scheduling of Work policies 

and procedures; 

9.  Completing Initial Ethics Orientation within 90 days of entry on duty as 

required by 5 C.F.R. § 2638.703; 

10. Complying with the ethics statutes in Title 18, United States Code, and the 
implementing ethics regulations promulgated by the Office of Government 
Ethics and DHS. COREs should seek guidance from his or her designated 
ethics attorney if issues arise that may be governed by these laws and 
regulations (contact FEMA’s Privacy Office for additional information and a 
listing of OCC Ethics Counselors);  

11. If designated as a Confidential Financial Disclosure filer, timely filing New 
Entrant and Annual OGE Form 450 reports (as required by 5 C.F.R. § 
2634 Subpart I); 

12. Completing annual ethics training, FQS training, and other required 

training; 

13. If the CORE is a reemployed civilian retiree receiving an annuity, providing 
a copy of his or her most recent annuity notice and all subsequent notices 
of change, indicating the monthly annuity amounts to OCCHCO prior to or 
at the time of appointment; 

14. Signing and complying with the conditions of a Continued Service 

Agreement (CSA) if approved to receive a recruitment, relocation, or 
retention incentive; 

15. Signing and abiding by the conditions of a CSA if selected to participate in 

a leadership development program; 

16. Returning all FEMA-owned equipment before separating from FEMA; and 

23 

 
17. Engaging in activities to promote their professional development. 

1-8.  Reporting Requirement 

The CORE program will be evaluated periodically to ensure that stated objectives 
are being met. Recommendations for improvement will be forwarded to the Chief 
Component Human Capital Officer and the Chief Financial Officer.  

1-9.  Forms Prescribed 

A.  FEMA Form 252-11-1-1, Request for CORE Action. 

B.  FEMA Form 30-35, Telephone Reference Check. 

C.  FEMA Form 106-1-1-1, Request for Work Schedule. 

D.  FEMA Form 119-7-1-3, Custody Receipt for Government Property On 

Personal Charge. 

E.  FEMA Form 123-9-0-1, Telework Application and Agreement Form. 

F.  FEMA Form 123-9-0-2, Employee Self Certification Health and Safety 

Checklist. 

G.  FEMA Form 254-1-1, Public Transportation Benefit Program Application. 

H.  Standard Form-50, Notification of Personnel Action. 

I.  Standard Form-52, Request for Personnel Action. 

J.  Standard Form 2809, Health Benefits Election Form. 

K.  TSP-1 Thrift Saving Plan Election Form. 

1-10.  No Private Right 

Nothing in this Manual shall be interpreted to create any right or benefit, 
substantive or procedural, enforceable at law by any party in any administrative 
or civil matter. 

1-11.  Questions 

Questions concerning the CORE Program should be addressed to OCCHCO at 
202-212-3962. Questions concerning the funding or certification process for 
Direct Charge CORE positions or requests for Distributed Cost COREs should be 
addressed to OCFO Field Based Operations at FEMA-fbo-action-
tracker@fema.dhs.gov.  

24 

 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 2:  RECRUITMENT AND HIRING 

2-1.  General 

A.  FEMA Offices and Directorates will identify the Selecting Official for each hire. 

B.  FEMA Offices and Directorates may elect to recruit and hire candidates via a 
vacancy announcement as specified in section 2-4, or via a name request 
pursuant to section 2-5. FEMA maintains the flexibility to use alternative hiring 
procedures not specified in this Chapter when necessary to meet its mission 
requirements. 

C.  Nepotism is prohibited by 5 U.S.C. § 3110 and is also a “prohibited personnel 
practice” under 5 U.S.C. § 2302(b)(7). Under 5 U.S.C. § 3110, a public official 
is prohibited from appointing, employing, promoting, advancing, or advocating 
for appointment, employment, promotion, or advancement of a relative in or to 
a civilian position in FEMA in which the public official is serving or over which 
the public official exercises jurisdiction or control of any individual who is a 
relative of the public official. Upon determining that a minimally qualified 
candidate is a relative or the relative of the Selecting Official, or of someone 
in the chain of command of the Selecting Official, the program office must 
refrain from taking action on the job vacancy and contact the servicing HR 
Specialist for guidance. Supervision of a relative is not generally considered 
to be “nepotism” but is prohibited as it presents an apparent conflict of 
interest. Supervision of employees with whom the supervisor has a “covered 
relationship” may also be an apparent conflict of interest (see 5 C.F.R. § 
2635.502). 

2-2.  Staffing Plans 

A.  Offices and Directorates authorized to fill CORE positions will conduct 
workload analyses every three years, or earlier if needed based on 
operational changes, to forecast and plan for future work and skills 
requirements based on historical data, technical estimates, directed 
requirements, and approved staffing models.  

1.  The workload analysis will first identify all activities performed by each 

position (e.g., PFT, CORE, and Reservist) within an Office or Directorate, 
and designate current and planned future activities.  

2.  The analysis will estimate how frequent the activity is performed, and the 
amount of time an employee will need to complete each of the identified 
activities for which a Distributed Group Activity Baseline has not been 
approved or is being modified. 

3.  The analysis may identify shortages or overages in current staffing needs, 
which will be documented and maintained by the Offices and Directorates 
until superseded by a subsequent workload analysis or other staffing 
initiative.  

25 

 
 
B.  Based on the workload analysis, Offices and Directorates requesting CORE 

positions will develop and submit staffing plans, subject to funding, to 
OCCHCO with the number of CORE positions by title, series, grade, and duty 
station.  

1.  OCCHCO will review the entity’s requested number of CORE positions 

and proposed length of appointment based on the workload analysis and 
staffing plan.  

2.  Upon OCCHCO’s review and approval of the staffing plan, OCCHCO will 
submit the plans to OCFO for approval if the plan includes a non-Direct 
Charge CORE, or a Distributed Group Activity Direct Charge CORE if the 
distributed group activity baseline has not been approved or has changed 
since the last approval. 

3.  Upon any needed confirmation from OCFO, OCCHCO will authorize an 

Office or Directorate to create or renew a set number of CORE Positions. 

4.  The Associate Administrator for Mission Support will review and resolve 
any disputes between an Office or Directorate and OCCHCO regarding 
the approval of a workload analysis or staffing plan.   

C.  Any request to add, move, rightsize, or adjust a CORE position (if rightsizing 
a position, see Chapter 12, Rightsizing) made between workload analysis 
cycles or that does not align with the current staffing plan must be submitted 
by the head of the Office or Directorate and will require a reexamination of the 
most recent workload analysis to determine whether the identified shortages 
or additional work exists to justify the requested position, its length, and pay 
band or grade. Upon OCCHCO’s review and approval of the staffing plan, 
OCCHCO will submit the plans to OCFO for approval if the plan includes a 
non-Direct Charge CORE, or a Distributed Group Activity Direct Charge 
CORE if the distributed group activity baseline has not been approved or has 
changed since the last approval. 

D.  Duty stations for COREs will be established by the supervisor of record in 

conjunction with OCCHCO. 

2-3.  Annual Direct Charge CORE Certification 

A.  An Annual Direct Charge CORE certification, validating and verifying the 

CORE’s performance of DRF related duties and the continued need for all 
CORE positions (which have not been requested or funded elsewhere in 
FEMA’s budget), is required by the Assistant Administrator, Associate 
Administrator, Regional Administrator, and any FEMA employee reporting 
directly to the Administrator. 

B.  CORE positions must be used to execute functions or activities funded solely 

by the DRF or DRS account and are not charged elsewhere in FEMA’s 
budget. COREs may be used to administer support to FEMA’s non-
permanent workforce hired under the Stafford Act, performing duties 
including, but not limited to, hiring and staffing, training and development, 

26 

 
 
personnel and payroll processing, legal support, developing and 
implementing disaster policies and decisions, supervising Stafford Act 
employees, maintaining information technology and telecommunications 
services for Stafford Act employees or events, financial management, 
property and facility management, and auditing and program oversight. 
OCFO and OCC will provide Directorates and Offices with supplemental 
guidance on the proper use of CORE positions as needed. 

C.  Offices and Directorates must also electronically maintain documentation 
supporting the creation, backfilling or reassignment of CORE positions. 
Offices and Directorates will maintain workload analyses, position 
justifications, and staffing plans. The electronic files2 are also subject to 
independent post-action compliance review by OCFO and/or OCCHCO.   

D.  Documentation requirements for “Direct Charge” COREs  

1. Comprehensive list of all COREs to include position title, area assigned, 

branch/office, duty station, grade, PIN, and CORE type.  

2. Algorithm(s), to include methodology and frequency of analysis, used to 

determine allocation of salary costs to open active disasters. 

3. A description of duties for each position or group of positions performing 
the same work that validates the relationship of work being performed to 
open, active disasters. Example: This Public Assistance (PA) Specialist 
will: (1) be responsible for the closeout of project worksheets, (2) deploy to 
disasters to support the development and obligation of PA projects, and (3) 
conduct eligibility review of public assistance projects.  

4. Baselines and supporting documentation for establishing the baselines for 

Distributed Activity Group “Direct-Charge” COREs.  

5. Documentation shall be maintained on OCFO’s SharePoint (see footnote 
2) and shall be made available to the OCFO and/or OCCHCO for review. 
Files must be maintained in accordance with the most current DHS records 
retention policy. 

2-4.  Procedures for Soliciting Candidates 

FEMA uses the procedures listed below to hire qualified candidates for CORE 
appointments unless a name request procedure is used (see section 2-5). 

A.  To advertise a CORE position, an Office or Directorate shall submit a 

Standard Form (SF-52) to OCCHCO with a position description. If desired, 
the Office or Directorate may also submit a draft vacancy announcement or 
instead, request that OCCHCO draft it. Additionally, the Office or Directorate 
may, but is not required to, submit a specialized experience statement and 
any assessment screen-out questions that should be included in the 
announcement for the purpose of screening out applicants who are not 

2 Electronic files should be uploaded to https://portalapps.fema.net/apps/ocfocore/Pages/default.aspx.  

27 

 
 
                                                           
minimally qualified for the position. Upon receipt of all required and optional 
documentation, the HR Specialist prepares (or reviews, if submitted) the 
Vacancy Announcement and sends the draft to the Office or Directorate for 
final approval. 

B.  The Office or Directorate, in consultation with the HR Specialist, may search 
for qualified candidates utilizing one or more of the following recruitment 
sources: 

1.  An email to all FEMA employees, FEMA employees who reside in a 

specific geographic area, or FEMA employees who already work in the 
Office or Directorate advertising the position; 

2.  Electronic posting on OPM’s USAJOBS website (https://usajobs.gov); 

3.  Outside sources, including but not limited to, other Federal agencies, state 

employment services, state and local emergency management 
organizations, professional societies, minority organizations, local 
colleges/universities and other educational facilities and sources; or 

4.  Other sources which, as approved by OCCHCO, will provide adequate 

competition. 

C.  At a minimum, the vacancy announcement posted through USA Jobs must 

include: 

1.  FEMA’s name; 

2.  Announcement number (for USA Jobs announcements only); 

3.  Title, series, and grade of the position, including promotion potential; 

4.  Opening and closing dates (except in the case of open announcements); 

5.  Duty location; 

6.  Number of vacancies; 

7.  Major duties of the position; 

8.  Length of appointment; 

9.  Qualification requirements; 

10. How to apply, including required supporting documentation; 

11. Statement that the appointment(s) is excepted from the competitive 

service, and are authorized under the Stafford Act; 

12. Statement that the selectee must sign a “conditions of employment” form; 

13. Statement that the selectee is subject to the “Every Employee Is An 

Emergency Manager” Memorandum, requiring capability to deploy for up 
to 30 consecutive days and changes to work locations, including a 
requirement to work at home in the event of emergencies or when 
otherwise directed; 

14. Equal employment opportunity statement; and 

28 

 
15. Reasonable accommodation statement. 

D.  All other vacancy announcement postings, authorized by section 2-4.B., must 

include, at a minimum: 

1.  Title, series, and grade of the position, including promotion potential; 

2.  Opening and closing dates (except in the case of open announcements); 

3.  Duty location; 

4.  Major duties of the position; 

5.  Length of appointment; 

6.  How to apply, including required supporting documentation; 

7.  Statement that the appointment(s) is excepted from the competitive 

service, and are authorized under the Stafford Act; 

8.  Statement that the selectee must sign a “conditions of employment” form; 

and 

9.  Statement that the selectee is subject to the “Every Employee Is An 

Emergency Manager” Memorandum, requiring capability to deploy for up 
to 30 consecutive days and changes to work locations, including a 
requirement to work at home in the event of emergencies or when 
otherwise directed. 

E.  Vacancy Announcements that are restricted to a particular geographical area 
or to FEMA employees will clearly identify any such restrictions and indicate 
that non-compliant applications will not receive consideration. 

F.  Once the Office or Directorate has approved the vacancy announcement, the 
Staffing HR Specialist posts the vacancy announcement via the sources 
previously agreed upon and notifies the Office or Directorate that the position 
has been posted. 

G.  Vacancy announcements shall be posted for a minimum of five days. If 
requested, OCCHCO may approve a shorter posting for good cause. 

H.  Minimum qualifications: Normally, OCCHCO reviews all submitted 

applications to ensure that applications have met the minimum qualifications 
and eligibility requirements and then refers all candidates deemed minimally 
qualified to the Selecting Official via a Certificate of Eligibles (CERT). 
Selecting Officials may request to receive all applications prior to OCCHCO’s 
review, in which case OCCHCO will conduct its review prior to issuance of 
any offer. Final qualification determinations are made by OCCHCO. 

I.  After a selection is made, the Selecting Official shall provide all selection 

documentation to OCCHCO for retention in accordance with A and B above 
(see section 3-9). The Selecting Official will indicate the action taken 
(selection, non-selection, declination, etc.) on each CERT and will return the 
CERT to the HR Specialist by the expiration date of the CERT, unless an 
extension is authorized by OCCHCO. 

29 

 
2-5.  Name Request 

A.  In lieu of utilizing the hiring procedures specified in section 2-4, Offices and 
Directorates may hire qualified candidates (eligible U.S. citizens, current 
Federal employees, or current FEMA COREs) via a name request to meet a 
hiring need or to promote a CORE to a grade outside of the CORE’s current 
position ladder. Such a promotion must include the same justification and 
approval established for name request hires (see Chapters 5 and 6 for more 
information on promotions). 

B.  The Office or Directorate must submit a justification that describes the 

individual’s qualifications with the SF-52 and resume. 

C.  Any name request must be approved in writing by the requesting 

organization’s Division Chief (or higher). 

D.  Name requests may be approved even if the Office or Directorate has not 

posted a vacancy announcement for the position or otherwise competed the 
position. 

E.  The HR Specialist will review the package to determine if the applicant meets 
the basic qualifications for the position and promptly notify the Selecting 
Official if the applicant is not minimally qualified. 

F.  Name request hiring actions must follow the interview, reference check, and 

job offer procedures outlined below. 

2-6. 

Interviews 

Interviews are conducted for candidates referred to the supervisor as a means of 
obtaining supplemental information on their qualifications. 

A.  At a minimum, the Selecting Official must interview the candidate selected for 
the position. The Selecting Official may designate one or more appropriate 
persons to conduct or participate in the interviews.  

B.  The Selecting Official should ask all candidates the same job-related 

questions and document the responses in writing. The Selecting Official 
should maintain such documentation for a minimum of two years. The 
Selecting Official should ask the same questions, in the same order, of all 
interviewed candidates. Follow-up questions to clarify information are 
permissible. It is preferable to conduct interviews in person and to use the 
same interview method for all applicants.  

C.  The Selecting Official should not ask questions regarding a candidate’s race, 
religion, sex, family status, national origin, religion, age, genetic background, 
health history, disability, political affiliation, or any other prohibited questions 
found in FEMA’s Interview and Selection Guidance, June 4, 2014.  

D.  The Selecting Official or his or her designee(s) may conduct a subsequent 

interview or contact one or more of the candidates for additional or clarifying 
information after completing and evaluating the initial interviews. The 

30 

 
 
 
supervisor should consult with the HR Specialist if a subsequent interview is 
deemed advisable to ensure that the reason for the subsequent interview is 
related to the requirements of the position. 

E.  Interview notes must be retained in accordance with section 2-10 and must 

not be destroyed. 

F.  In accordance with the Every Employee is an Emergency Manager (EE-EM) 
initiative,3 all employees conducting hiring interviews must explain and 
reiterate, using a set of standard questions and briefing points, the EE-EM 
vision that all COREs must be willing to receive incident support or incident 
management assignments. Additionally, all new COREs are required to sign 
an acknowledgment form confirming their understanding of the EE-EM policy. 
The supervisor must ensure that the EE-EM vision is explained in all initial 
interviews and that any candidate who is referred for hire or further 
examination has completed the applicable acknowledgment form. This form 
can be obtained from the serving HR Specialist. 

G.  All new COREs must acknowledge the requirement to work at a Directed 

Work Location, which may be the CORE’s Residence of Record or another 
alternate duty location, in the event of office closures, emergencies, or when 
otherwise directed. 

2-7.  Reference Checks 

The Selecting Official must check and document a candidate’s references before 
the candidate receives a job offer. Reference checking is a vital part of a 
successful hiring strategy and is primarily used to verify information provided by 
the candidate; better predict the candidate’s on-the-job success; and gain 
additional information about the candidate’s qualifications for the position. 
Selecting Officials may use FEMA Form 30-35, Telephone Reference Check, to 
satisfy the requirement to document reference checks. Selecting Officials should 
coordinate with OCCHCO prior to deciding not to hire a candidate because of a 
reference check. 

2-8.  Job Offers 

All offers of employment must be made by OCCHCO. The servicing HR 
Specialist must confirm qualifications and the proposed rate of pay for the 
candidate with the Selecting Official prior to extending an offer. Additionally, the 
HR Specialist will confirm acceptance of the offer and will consult with the 
Selecting Official in establishing an entrance on duty (EOD) date once the 
appropriate background check has been made by OCSO.  

3 See Memorandum from the Deputy Administrator, Every Employee an Emergency Manager—
Action Items, January 20, 2012. 

31 

 
 
 
 
                                                           
2-9.  Notification to Applicants 

OCCHCO Talent Acquisition Division will acknowledge receipt of all applications 
and notify all applicants if they have or have not been selected for the position. 

2-10.  Recordkeeping Requirements 

A.  Supervisors shall create, maintain, use and dispose of FEMA records in 

accordance with applicable law and FD 141-1, FEMA Records Management 
Program. 

B.  Pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1602.14 and in accordance with Equal Employment 
Opportunity Commission (EEOC) regulations, all personnel records made or 
kept by FEMA, including but not limited to, application forms submitted by 
applicants, name request justifications, interview notes, reference check 
documents, and other records having to do with hiring, shall be preserved for 
one year from the date of the making of the record or of the personnel action 
involved, whichever occurs later. 

C.  If applicable, when a non-selectee challenges the non-selection before an 

administrative or judicial body, OCCHCO and the supervisor must retain the 
aforementioned documentation until the final disposition of the charge or 
lawsuit. OCC will notify OCCHCO and the supervisor of any litigation holds 
and when documentation relating to a charge or lawsuit may be disposed of 
according to FEMA’s record retention policy. 

32 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 3:  APPOINTMENTS 

3-1.  Eligibility for Appointment 

All applicants selected for appointment to CORE positions must meet the 
following eligibility requirements: 
A.  U.S. Citizenship, subject to limited exceptions;4 

B.  Must be at least 18 years of age and:  

1.  Have graduated from high school or been awarded a certificate equivalent 

to graduating from high school; 

2.  Have completed a formal vocational training program;  

3.  Have received a statement from school authorities agreeing with their 
preference for employment rather than continuing their education; or 

4.  Be currently enrolled in a secondary school and either work only during 

school vacation periods or work part-time during the school year under a 
formal employment program; 

C.  Must comply with selective service registration for males born after 12/31/59; 
D.  Must satisfy fitness requirements for the position to which appointed;5 and 

E.  Must agree to accept an Incident Management or Incident Support 

assignment.6 

3-2.  CORE Appointments 

A.  COREs are hired under a Stafford Act appointment authority and their 

salaries and benefits are funded by the DRF, thus the scope of their duties 
must predominately carryout Stafford Act activities.   

B.  Individuals appointed to CORE positions are given time-limited appointments 
for a period of not less than two years but not to exceed four years unless the 
appointment is renewed for another term. The length of the appointment 
requested by the Office or Directorate should be commensurate with the 
expected amount of work available for the CORE in question (the 
appointment can be less than two years if appropriate). 

C.  A CORE appointment does not confer eligibility or priority consideration for a 

permanent appointment. 

D.  A CORE’s work schedule may be changed and a CORE may be assigned a 
Mission Essential, Incident Management, Incident Support, or Ancillary 

4 See DHS Management Directive 3120.2, Employment of Non-Citizens, March 22, 2004. 
5 See DHS Instruction 121-01-007, DHS Personnel Suitability and Security Program, June 2009. 
6 See Memorandum from the Deputy Administrator, Every Employee an Emergency Manager—
Action Items, January 20, 2012. 

33 

 
 
                                                           
Support title, irrespective of his or her position description, based on the 
operational needs of FEMA. 

E.  COREs are not subject to any protection afforded by reduction-in-force 

provisions, re-employment rights, or adverse action procedures established 
under any statutory or regulatory provision. 

F.  COREs must be ready to deploy wherever FEMA needs their services and 

have 24 hours to respond to a deployment order and may be required to work 
long hours under stressful and unfavorable conditions. 

G.  A CORE’s appointment will end on the Not to Exceed (NTE) date of his or her 
appointment, unless it is extended or renewed based on the needs of FEMA. 

H.  COREs may be appointed to supervisory positions and serve as supervisors 
of record for other Stafford Act employees, provided that the CORE is hired 
into a position description classified as supervisory and completes mandatory 
supervisory training. COREs may serve as a temporary duty supervisor 
during a deployment, so long as the work supervised arises out of the 
Stafford Act and the period of supervision is temporary and/or short-term. 

I.  COREs, who serve as the supervisor of record for PFTs on the date when 

this Manual becomes effective, may continue to serve in such capacity until 
the CORE’s current term expires. 

3-3.  Conditions of Employment 

All CORE appointees are required to sign a Conditions of Employment statement 
upon appointment, and upon renewal of an appointment. COEs contain 
significant, but not all of, the DHS/FEMA and other rules and regulations that 
COREs must abide by, including but not limited to: 
A.  Complying with FEMA’s deployment procedures and policies;7 

B.  Using electronic funds transfer for salary payments and travel 

reimbursements; 

C.  Maintaining eligibility for a government issued travel charge card, and abiding 
by the terms and conditions established by the bank issuing the travel card  
and FEMA (see FD 122-9, Travel Charge Card, or superseding document); 

D.  Presenting and conducting themselves at all times in compliance with the 

standards of ethical conduct provided by the Office of Governmental Ethics 
(see 5 C.F.R. part 2635), preserving the public trust, and adhering to 
DHS/FEMA rules and regulations; 

E.  Traveling in the most expeditious and cost effective manner, abiding by DHS  

and FEMA travel policy to make all travel arrangements; 

7 See FD 010-8, FEMA Incident Workforce Deployment, January 29, 2014. 

34 

 
 
                                                           
F.  If authorized to use a motor vehicle for official business, complying with all 
applicable laws, regulations, and policies related to official motor vehicle 
usage; 

G.  Abiding by the terms of use in all revocable licensing agreements with respect 
to all FEMA-issued property, and using FEMA-issued property for official 
purposes only; and 

H.  Complying with FEMA Manual 123-9-1, Telework, if their supervisor 

authorizes telework. 

Failure to comply with these conditions of employment, or any other standards of 
conduct, may result in disciplinary action, up to and including removal from 
Federal service (see Chapter 11). 

3-4.  Directed Work Location 

COREs will work at their Residence of Record or other designated locations by 
FEMA supervisors and managers, if so directed. COREs may be directed to work 
at alternate locations on days when their regular worksite is closed due, but not 
limited to, weather closures, localized emergencies, facility safety, or for 
operational needs. COREs working at a Directed Work Location are not 
teleworking. 

3-5.  Oath of Office 

A.  The following FEMA personnel are authorized to administer the oath of office 

to newly appointed COREs or to delegate this authority: 

1.  The Administrator; 

2.  Deputy Administrator; 

3.  Regional Administrators; 

4.  The Chief Component Human Capital Officer; 

5.  Federal Coordinating Officers; and 

6.  Federal Disaster Recovery Coordinators. 

B.  The above officials may delegate authority to administer the oath of office to 

an employee at initial onboarding. 

3-6.  Government Property 

A.  As soon as practicable after appointment, FEMA shall furnish each CORE 
with appropriate mobile communication and/or computing equipment as 
determined by the current property authorization list. 

B.  COREs shall keep the equipment charged and accessible, and shall seek 

prompt assistance for malfunctioning equipment. 

C.  All COREs are required to accept receipt of all FEMA-issued equipment and 
sign FEMA Form 119-7-1-3. By signing this form, the CORE acknowledges 

35 

 
 
 
 
acceptance of and responsibility for the equipment and becomes a Custodian 
of the equipment, as set forth in FEMA Directive 119-7, Federal Personal 
Property Management, dated September 24, 2013. Violation of this 
agreement may result in disciplinary action, up to and including removal. 

D.  COREs shall only use, display, or present their FEMA-issued government 

identification card for lawful and authorized purposes. 

3-7.  Reassignments to a New Position 

If a CORE is reassigned to a new position, the CORE must meet the minimum 
qualifications for the position and an Office or Directorate head must approve the 
reassignment. 

3-8.  Detail Assignments 

A.  A CORE may be temporarily placed on a detail to carry out a discrete 

function. If a CORE is placed on a detail, the duties and responsibilities 
performed by the CORE must be payable under the Stafford Act with the 
exception described in part C below. 

B.  Details to perform Stafford Act activities. Absent approval from OPM, a CORE 
may not be detailed to a competitive service position. A CORE may be placed 
on a detail assignment for up to 120 days that may be renewed for one 
additional 120 day period. OCCHCO must approve a CORE detailed to a 
position for more than 120 days or to positions at a higher pay level. See 
Chapter 14 for more information on rotational assignments. 

C.  A CORE may be detailed for mission and operational needs or for training to 

perform non-Stafford Act activities described below:  

1.  Non-Stafford Act Mission and Operational Detail. Pursuant to 6 U.S.C. § 

314 the Administrator is vested with the authority to carry out all 
authorities of FEMA. Upon a determination that urgent and compelling 
circumstances exist in order to carry out the FEMA mission or support to 
other Federal agency incident operations, a CORE may be placed on a 
temporary detail to perform non-Stafford Act activities under the following 
conditions:  

i.  The detail shall not exceed 90 days per appointment unless approved 

by OCC; and  

ii.  The detailed CORE’s salaries, benefits, and associated expenses must 
be paid from the account normally charged for carrying out the gaining 
program or activity for the duration of the detail. 

iii.  Note that training activities and other duties needed to prepare a 

CORE for a mission essential detail may be conducted outside of the 
90 day detail period but must be justified and approved in advance. In 
such circumstances, the training time and the detail time, will be 
charged to the receiving program or office. 

36 

 
 
 
2.  Non-Stafford Act Training Details. FEMA may authorize a non-Stafford Act 

detail of COREs under the following conditions:  

i.  A determination must be made that the training of the CORE, and thus 
the increased ability of that CORE to carry out future Stafford Act 
activities, is the primary purpose and benefit of the non-Stafford Act 
assignment;  

ii.  The detail may not exceed 30 days without a determination that a 

detail of more than 30 days is warranted;  

iii.  Extensions of these details beyond 30 days are made every 30 days 

thereafter and shall not exceed 90 days per appointment; and 

iv.   The detailed COREs may have their salaries and benefits funded by 

the DRF. 

3.  COREs carrying-out non-Stafford Act activities must be justified as either 
an urgent and compelling mission/operation-related detail or a training 
assignment. Under no circumstances, may FEMA use both of these 
justifications for the same non-Stafford Act activity. In both instances, the 
CORE is limited to one non-Stafford Act detail per appointment, unless 
approved by OCC.  

3-9.  Reappointment Procedures 

A.  OCCHCO provides each Office and Directorate with a list of COREs and their 

expiration dates on a biweekly basis. 

B.   A CORE’s appointment will end on the Not-to-Exceed (NTE) date of his or her 
appointment, unless it is renewed by the Office or Directorate. All requests to 
renew the appointment of a current CORE must be submitted by the 
supervisor of record to OCCHCO using an SF-52, Request for Personnel 
Action. 

C.  Two months before the end of a CORE’s appointment, if a supervisor of 

record determines that a CORE’s appointment should not be renewed, the 
supervisor must contact OCCHCO/Employee Relations on how to notify the 
CORE that the CORE’s appointment will not be renewed.   

3-10.  Resignation 

COREs may resign at any time prior to the termination or expiration of their 
appointments. COREs must state in writing the reason for the resignation and the 
requested effective date of the resignation. A CORE may request rescission of 
the resignation prior to the effective date, but FEMA is not obligated to consider 
or grant such a request. FEMA is not obligated to grant the request in order to 
avoid removal for misconduct or poor performance. FEMA may not deny the 
request for any reason prohibited by Title 29, U.S. Code, or any applicable EEOC 
regulations. 

37 

 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 4:  COMPENSATION PROVISIONS 

4-1.  Applicability 

The compensation provided to COREs includes the provisions found in this 
Chapter regardless of the pay plan covering the CORE, unless otherwise stated. 

4-2.  Establishment of CORE Pay Plan 

COREs are paid via an administratively determined “IC” pay plan. COREs paid 
via the GS scale or GS based pay bands will be transferred to the IC pay plan of 
either grades and steps or pay bands at their current rate of pay. FEMA 
managers, in conjunction with OCCHCO, are given the option to utilize one of 
two pay scales; a pay scale consisting of pay bands or a pay scale consisting of 
grades and steps (see Chapters 5 and 6). Offices or Directorates may change 
the pay plan for all COREs assigned to the Office or Directorate with OCCHCO 
approval. 

4-3.  Conversion Actions 

The first-level supervisor may recommend adjustment of pay upon conversion 
from another FEMA appointment to a CORE appointment (see sections 5-3 and 
6-3 for information on conversions that result in a decrease in pay). 

4-4.  Position Management and Classification 

The Position Management and Classification Manual, FM 252-2-1, June 19, 
2014, provides guidance for the classification and position management of 
CORE positions. The rules and procedures for position classification reviews 
(i.e., desk audits) and classification appeals found in FM 252-2-1 do not apply to 
CORE positions. 

4-5.  Locality Pay 

A.  Locality pay is an additional sum of money administratively-determined by 
OCCHCO and added to a CORE’s base pay to account for the difference 
between the pay of government workers and private sector workers in a given 
geographic location. Locality pay is considered a part of basic pay and is 
applied to the minimum and maximum rates of each pay plan.  

B.  COREs, such as IM COREs, who physically work full time from their 

residence of record, will receive the locality pay assigned to their residence of 
record’s locality pay area, even if the CORE reports or is assigned to a FEMA 
fixed facility with a different locality pay rate.  

C.  When a CORE moves from an official duty station in one locality pay area to 

an official duty station in a different locality pay area, OCCHCO will adjust the 
CORE’s basic pay to reflect the difference in the administratively-determined 
locality pay rates. Pay retention is not applicable to geographic changes in 
locality. 

38 

 
 
 
 
 
 
4-6.  Cost of Living Increase 

OCCHCO may periodically recommend that the Administrator adjust pay scales 
for the CORE program. For example, an adjustment may be appropriate to reflect 
a cost of living increase, but need not coincide with changes to pay and wage 
schedules by Congress, OPM, or OPM’s designee. In such circumstances, 
OCCHCO will review current CORE pay rates and recommend the proper 
percentage adjustment that is appropriate. 

4-7.  Pay Ceilings and Premium Pay 

Absent a waiver for the bi-weekly pay cap, the maximum rate of basic pay for a 
FLSA-exempt CORE may not exceed the rate payable for Level V of the 
Executive Schedule or the rate for GS-15 Step 10 employees (including locality 
pay), whichever is higher (see FM 253-2-1, Premium Pay). The maximum 
aggregate amount any CORE may receive in basic pay, bonuses, and 
allowances is the rate for Level I of the Executive Schedule. 

The rules and regulations governing premium pay, including, but not limited to, 
the bi-weekly and annual pay caps, overtime, compensatory time off, and night 
differential for COREs is found in FM 253-2-1, Premium Pay. 

4-8.  Recruitment, Relocation, or Retention Incentives 

A.  In General 

1.  A recruitment incentive is a one-time, lump-sum payment to a newly 

appointed CORE to a position that is determined to be critical to FEMA’s 
mission and in the absence of the incentive, would be difficult to fill. 

2.  A relocation incentive is a one-time, lump-sum payment to a current 

CORE who agrees to relocate with no break in service to accept a FEMA 
position in a different geographic area if the position is likely to be difficult 
to fill in the absence of the incentive. 

3.  A retention incentive is paid to a current CORE if the CORE has unusually 
high or unique qualifications, or an Office or Directorate has a special 
need for the CORE’s services that makes it essential to retain the CORE, 
and the CORE would likely leave the Federal service in the absence of a 
retention incentive. The CORE must have stated an intent to resign or 
retire, in writing, or must have submitted his or her resignation or 
retirement paperwork prior to authorization. 

4.  The employing office must consider at least the following factors, as 
applicable to the case at hand, when deciding whether to pay a 
recruitment or relocation incentive: 

i.  The success of recent efforts to recruit candidates for similar positions, 
including indicators such as offer acceptance rates, the proportion of 
positions filled, and the length of time required to fill similar positions; 

ii.  Recent turnover in similar positions; 

39 

 
 
 
iii.  Labor-market factors that may affect the ability of the office to recruit 

candidates for similar positions now or in the future; 

iv.  Special qualifications needed for the position; and 

v.  The practicality of using an advanced rate alone or in combination with 

a recruitment or relocation incentive. 

5.  The employing office must consider at least the following factors, as 

applicable to the case at hand, when deciding whether to pay a retention 
incentive: 

i.  The success of recent efforts to recruit candidates and retain 

employees with qualifications similar to those possessed by the CORE 
for positions similar to the position held by the CORE; and 

ii.  The availability in the labor market of candidates for employment who, 

with minimal training or disruption of service to the public, could 
perform the full range of duties and responsibilities assigned to the 
position held by the CORE. 

6.  The use of a recruitment, relocation, or retention incentive is not to be 
used as a substitute for traditional recruiting efforts that could yield a 
competent and qualified employee without the use of such an incentive.  

B.  Justification and Approval. The Selecting Official or supervisor of record shall 
submit a justification for any request for a recruitment, relocation, or retention 
incentive through the head of his or her Office or Directorate for approval. 
Office or Directorate heads may approve an incentive amount less than 
$20,000, or less than 25% of a CORE’s base pay. Any incentive request with 
a lump sum greater than or equal to $20,000, or greater than or equal to 25% 
of a CORE’s base pay must be submitted by the Associate Administrator or 
Office Chief (if the Office Chief reports directly to the Administrator) 
overseeing the requesting organization and be approved by the Administrator 
or designee, but at least by the Chief of Staff and OCCHCO. In all cases, 
OCCHCO must approve the incentive request and OCFO must certify the 
availability of funds prior to authorizing payment. All justifications shall 
include, at a minimum, the following information: 

1.  The amount and timing of the approved incentive; 

2.  For retention incentives, the payment schedule for the incentives and the 

maximum number of payments or end date for the payments; and 

3.  The basis for determination that the skills and work experience of the 
applicant or CORE are of substantial value, or that, without such an 
incentive, the position would be difficult-to-fill. The basis should be based 
on at least one factor from subsection A.4 if a recruitment or relocation 
bonus, or one factor from subsection A.5 if a retention incentive. 

C.  COREs who receive a recruitment, relocation, or retention incentive must sign 
and comply with the terms of a Continuing Service Agreement (CSA). See 
Chapter 15, Continuing Service Agreements, for more information.  

40 

 
4-9.  Offset Provision for Civilian Retirees 

A.  Retirees from the federal service who are receiving a federal retirement 

annuity and become reemployed by the federal government, absent a waiver, 
will have their salaries reduced by the amount of the annuity they are entitled 
to receive during the period of reemployment, pursuant to 5 U.S.C. § 8344(a). 

B.  COREs who are reemployed annuitants must provide OCCHCO with a copy 

of their most recent annuity notice issued by OPM, and all subsequent notices 
of change, indicating the monthly annuity amount to the Payroll and 
Processing Operations Division, OCCHCO prior to or at the time of 
appointment. 

41 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 5:  COMPENSATION (PAY BANDS) 

5-1.  General 

A.  This Chapter addresses the rules and procedures associated with 

compensating COREs via pay bands, which is one of the pay scales under 
the IC pay plan.  

B.  Each pay band established for the IC pay plan corresponds to a range of pay 
and classification levels, such that bands replace grades and steps, and 
series are retained. Positions are classified by title, career path, and 
occupational series. The pay range for each pay band is equivalent to the pay 
range of GS and IC grades and steps within the pay band. A CORE may not 
receive base pay in excess of his or her pay band unless they are promoted 
to a position classified at a higher pay band. 

1.  Band 1 corresponds to GS 1 to GS 6. 

2.  Band 2 corresponds to GS 7 to GS 9. 

3.  Band 3 corresponds to GS 10 to GS 11. 

4.  Band 4 corresponds to GS 12 to GS 13. 

5.  Band 5 corresponds to GS 14 to GS 15. 

C.  The major duties and responsibilities of each CORE position are included in 
the position description. The position description is analyzed by a Human 
Resources Classification Specialist to determine the title and pay band of the 
position. This analysis of the work to be performed and comparison of the 
work to established standards is referred to as position classification and 
applies the principle of equal pay for equal work. 

D.  Exceptions to the policies and procedures contained within this Chapter may 
be authorized by the CCHCO to respond to an emergent and unexpected 
mission need arising from a Level I disaster, to alleviate severe hardship to 
individuals resulting from any error on the part of FEMA in effecting personnel 
actions, or to address unusual situations that were not anticipated when this 
policy was drafted. 

5-2.  Setting Basic Rate of Pay 

A.  The Selecting Official is delegated the authority to assign a yearly basic pay 
amount within the position classified pay band. Pay setting criteria may 
include:  

1.  The prior salary of the candidate;  

2.  The overall qualifications of the candidate;  

3.  The recency of the individual’s relevant experience;  

4.  The qualifications and pay of employees in similar positions in the work 

unit;  

42 

 
 
5.  Salary comparability to non-Federal pay rates for similar work;  

6.  Special qualification requirements associated with the vacant position;  

7.  Turnover rates for the position;  

8.  Scarcity of qualified candidates; or 

9.  Programmatic urgency. 

B.  Any request for a rate above the minimum rate within the position classified 
pay band(s) must include a justification drafted by the Selecting Official and 
approved by the second level supervisor. This justification must include:  

1.  The candidate’s name; 

2.  The title, grade, and recommended rate of the vacant position; and 

3.  The factors and determination that support the pay rate determination. 

C.  Pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1602.14 and in accordance with Equal Employment 
Opportunity Commission regulations, the justification for setting pay higher 
than the minimum rate shall be preserved for one year from the date of its 
making. 

5-3.  Pay Adjustments 

Adjustments to pay within a classified pay band may be requested by the 
supervisor of record for review and approval by the Human Resources Specialist 
without written justification or approval from the second level supervisor. Such 
adjustments may be given under the following circumstances: 

A.  Reassignment of a CORE from one position to another position within the 

same classified pay band if the responsibilities of the new position warrant an 
increase or decrease in base pay to further the principles of equal pay for 
equal work; 

B.  A pay change, of either an increase or decrease, to compensate for an 

increase or decrease in locality pay in conjunction with a move to another 
geographic area; or 

C.  Receipt of a merit-based increase (see section 5-4). 

5-4.  Merit-Based Increase 

A.  A CORE who is not already receiving the maximum basic pay for his or her 

position may receive a merit-based increase at the conclusion of the 
performance year. 

B.  A CORE, who receives a rating of record of “Achieved Expectations”, or 
equivalent, is eligible for a merit-based increase of up to 3%; a rating of 
record of “Exceeded Expectations” or equivalent, is eligible for a merit-based 
increase of up to 4%; or a rating of record of “Achieved Excellence” or 
equivalent, is eligible for a merit-based increase of up to 5%. 

43 

 
 
 
C.  A CORE, who receives a rating of “unacceptable”, or equivalent, is not eligible 

for a merit-based increase.8 

D.  A CORE’s supervisor of record must send an SF-52, approved by the second 

level supervisor, to the Payroll and Processing Division, OCCHCO for 
processing, certifying that the CORE has received an annual rating of record 
for the most recent performance cycle and that the percentage increase to 
basic pay sought by the supervisor of record is in compliance with the 
requirements established by section 5-3 above. 

5-5.  Promotion 

A.  A promotion is a personnel action that moves a CORE from one classified 
band to another in the same career path. A promotion may also be the 
selection and appointment of a CORE to a position in another career path or 
region to which the CORE applies. This may result in a combination of an 
increase in the CORE’s salary and a change in position description. If the 
CORE is moved to a different position, in the same pay band, with the same 
or similar duties, the personnel action is a reassignment with retained pay.  

B.  The CORE’s supervisor of record must certify that the CORE’s most recent 
performance rating was at least “Achieved Expectations” or equivalent, next 
higher graded work exists for the CORE to perform, the CORE’s new position 
description captures the duties to be performed, and the higher graded 
position is approved and funded. A CORE may be hired into a position in a 
higher pay band via vacancy announcement or a name request, if the Office 
or Directorate has an existing higher position available or creates a new 
position according to the procedures detailed in section 2-2. 

C.  The new basic pay rate upon promotion may be set at any level in the new 
band, but the CORE must receive at least a six percent minimum pay 
increase over his or her previous salary. If the CORE moves to a different 
career path, any band in the new career path would be considered a “new 
band” for the purposes of determining his or her salary. 

5-6.  Change to a Lower Pay Band 

When a CORE moves from his or her current position to a position at a lower pay 
band the action is referred to as a change to a lower pay band. The 
circumstances underlying the supervisor’s recommendation to initiate a change 
to a lower pay band will determine how pay is set. 

A.  A CORE who exhibits poor performance and fails to improve acceptably will 
be terminated (see Chapter 11 for more information). In rare occasions, 
COREs may be demoted in lieu of removal due to poor performance. In such 
circumstances, pay is set at a lower pay band such that there is a reduction in 

8 Supervisors who encounter poor performance should consult Chapter 11: Procedures for 
Misconduct and Poor Performance. 

44 

 
 
 
                                                           
pay equivalent to at least two steps (using the pay intervals from the grades 
and steps scale) below the higher banded position.  

B.  When a CORE requests a change to lower pay band for personal reasons or 
convenience, including through application for an announced vacancy at a 
lower pay band, the action is considered a voluntary change to a lower pay 
band. For voluntary changes to a lower pay band, the new rate will be set 
according to the procedures in section 5-2, and should include any merit 
based increases that the CORE would have received during the qualified 
period. 

C.  The reclassification of a position by OCCHCO to a lower pay band will result 
in a reduction in pay and pay will be set in accordance with the classification 
decision. Pay will be set according to the procedures detailed in section 5-2. 
No appeal of the reclassification decision or pay retention is permitted, 
subject to any applicable collective bargaining agreement. 

45 

 
 
 
CHAPTER 6:  COMPENSATION (GRADES AND STEPS) 

6-1.  General 

A.   A CORE may be paid via an administratively-determined “IC” grades and 

steps pay scale, as described in this Chapter. The pay scale consists of 15 
pay grades (IC-1 to IC-15) with 10 steps per grade. The pay sums associated 
with the IC pay scale mirror the GS scale. 

For example, a CORE hired at IC-11, Step 1 under the IC pay plan would be 
paid at the same basic rate of pay as a GS-11, Step 1 employee under the 
GS scale.  

B.  Exceptions to the policies and procedures contained within this Chapter may 
be authorized by the CCHCO to respond to an emergent and unexpected 
mission need arising from a Level 1 disaster, to alleviate severe hardship to 
individuals resulting from any error on the part of FEMA in effecting personnel 
actions or to address unusual situations that were not anticipated when this 
policy was drafted. 

6-2.  Setting Basic Rate of Pay 

A.  The position description is the primary source of information used in setting 
pay in the IC pay series. Other information used in setting pay is (1) the 
geographic location (official duty station) of the position; and, (2) the 
individual’s prior employment, salary history, and qualifications. 

B.  The major duties and responsibilities of each CORE position are included in 
its position description. The position description is analyzed by a Human 
Resources Specialist to determine the title and grade range of the position. 
This analysis of the work to be performed and comparison of the work to 
established standards is referred to as position classification and applies the 
principle of equal pay for equal work. 

C.  A new appointment is an individual’s first appointment as an employee of the 
Federal government. Pay for all new COREs will be set at the minimum rate 
(Step 1) of the grade of the position, unless the CORE is approved for an 
advanced rate (see part E Advanced to a Higher Step). 

D.  If the CORE has prior federal service (including as a current or former FEMA 
employee), OCCHCO sets the basic rate of pay at the minimum rate for the 
position, unless they receive an advanced rate (as discussed below) or the 
highest pay rate previously received during Federal service, whichever is 
higher.9 Before setting pay at the highest pay rate previously received during 
Federal service, the Selecting Official should consider: 

1.  The overall qualifications of the individual; 

2.  The recency of the individual’s relevant experience; 

9 If the employee’s highest previously-received pay rate falls between two steps of the IC pay 
scale, the Selecting Official may request that the employee’s pay be set at the higher step. 

46 

 
 
                                                           
3.  The qualifications and pay of employees in similar positions in the work 

unit; and 

4.  The potential impact on the morale of those employees if the candidate 

were to receive the maximum payable rate. 

E.  Advanced to a Higher Step.  

1.  Prior to a candidate entering on duty, the Selecting Official will consider 
whether pay above the minimum rate of the grade should be made for a 
CORE. 

2.  Pay rate decisions maintain equity between the pay of the new hire and 

that of current employees, including COREs, performing comparable work. 
The advanced rate may not exceed step 10 of the applicable grade to 
which the candidate will be hired. 

3.  Required documentation and approval: 

i.  A request to advance a CORE up to step four may be submitted by the 
first or second level supervisor to OCCHCO for approval. A request to 
advance a CORE to step five and above must be submitted by the 
head of an Office or Directorate to OCCHCO for approval. The request 
must be accompanied by a written justification that includes: 

a.   The candidate’s name; 

b.  The title, grade, and recommended rate of the vacant position; and 

c.  The factors and determination that support the pay rate 

determination. This may include, but is not limited to, salary 
comparability, special qualification requirements, turnover rates, 
scarcity of qualified candidates, or programmatic urgency. 

ii.  The first or second level supervisor must submit a recommendation for 
an advanced rate appointment well in advance of establishing an 
entrance on duty date to ensure sufficient time for OCCHCO to act on 
the request before the appointment becomes effective. 

iii.  Pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 1602.14 and in accordance with EEOC 

regulations, the justification shall be preserved for one year from the 
date of its making. 

6-3.  Pay Adjustments 

Adjustments to pay within a grade after the pay rate is initially set may be given 
under the following circumstances: 

A.  Reassignment of a CORE from one position to another position if the 

responsibilities of the new position warrant an increase or decrease in base 
pay to further the principles of equal pay for equal work; 

47 

 
 
B.  A pay change, of either an increase or decrease, to compensate for an 

increase or decrease in locality pay in conjunction with a move to a different 
official duty station in another geographic area; or 

C.  Receipt of a step increase (see section 6-4). 

6-4.  Step Increases 

A.  A CORE who is not already at the highest step of his or her current grade 
may be advanced to the next higher step at the conclusion of the waiting 
period assigned to their current rate. 

1.  While FEMA’s Stafford Act authorities permit FEMA the authority to 

compensate without regard to Title 5, FEMA adopts the waiting periods for 
advancement to the next highest step established by 5 U.S.C. § 5335 and 
its implementing regulation at 5 C.F.R. § 531.405 as a matter of policy for 
all COREs paid via grades and steps. 

2.  A CORE is not automatically entitled to receive a step increase at the 

conclusion of his or her waiting period.  

3.  To receive the step increase, the CORE’s supervisor of record must sign 
the step increase document and return to OCCHCO for processing, 
certifying that the CORE: 

i.  Has completed the requisite waiting period;  

ii.  Has not received an equivalent increase during the waiting period; and  

iii.  His or her summary rating level for the most recent performance was 

at least “Achieved Expectations” or equivalent. 

4.  If a supervisor determines that a CORE’s performance is not at an 

acceptable level, the supervisor should contact OCCHCO/Employee 
Relations at least two months before the end of the required waiting period 
for a step increase, to draft a notification to the CORE stating that the 
CORE’s next step increase is being withheld, the reason for the negative 
determination, and what the CORE must do to improve his or her 
performance to be granted the step increase. 

B.  Prior to the completion of the requisite waiting period, a supervisor may 
recommend one additional step increase if warranted by the CORE’s 
performance. To receive the additional step increase, the CORE’s supervisor 
of record must send a justification describing the accomplishments and 
performance exhibited by the CORE that would warrant an increase in pay, 
and an SF-52 approved by the second level supervisor to OCCHCO for 
processing. OCCHCO will review the request to ensure COREs who exhibit 
similar performance receive similar pay. 

48 

 
 
 
6-5.  Promotion 

A.  A promotion is a personnel action that moves a qualified CORE from one 

grade to another in the same career path or to a grade in another career path 
in combination with an increase in the CORE’s salary. 

B.  The CORE’s supervisor of record must certify that the CORE’s most recent 
performance rating was at least “Achieved Expectations” or equivalent, next 
higher graded work exists for the CORE to perform, the CORE’s new position 
description captures the duties to be performed, and the higher graded 
position is approved and funded. A CORE may be hired into a position at a 
higher grade via vacancy announcement or a name request, if the Office or 
Directorate has an existing higher graded position available or creates a new 
position according to the procedures detailed in section 2-2.  

C.  For promotions, pay is set at the lowest pay rate in the new grade; however, 
the new pay rate must exceed the CORE’s existing pay rate by at least two 
steps. If the annual rate of the new position falls between two steps of the 
new grade, the higher step may be used. For example, an IC-7, Step 3 at 
FEMA HQ, with an annual pay rate of $45,473, who is promoted to an IC-8, is 
entitled to at least an increase in pay equal to two steps from the position 
from which she was promoted at IC-7 Step 5, or $48,315. Because the annual 
pay rate for an IC-8, Step 1 is $47,212, it does not satisfy the two-step 
increase requirement. Therefore, pay is set at IC-8, Step 2 or $48,786. 

6-6.  Change to Lower Grade 

When a CORE moves from his or her current position to a position at a lower 
grade the action is referred to as a change to lower grade. The circumstances 
underlying the supervisor’s recommendation to initiate a change to lower grade 
will determine how pay is set. 

A.  A CORE who exhibits poor performance and fails to improve acceptably will 
be terminated (see Chapter 11 for more information). In rare occasions, 
COREs may be demoted in lieu of removal due to poor performance. Upon 
demotion, the pay rate must be set at least two steps below the current pay 
rate. If the two-step reduction results in a rate that falls between two steps of 
the lower grade, the lower step must be used. 

B.  When a CORE requests a change to lower grade for personal reasons or 
convenience, including through application for an announced vacancy at a 
lower grade, the action is considered a voluntary change to a lower grade. 
For voluntary changes to a lower grade, the new rate should include any step 
increase that the CORE would have received during the qualifying period and 
pay should be set at: 

1.  The minimum  payable rate of basic pay for the lower grade; or 

2.  The highest previous rate received under Federal service, if the action is 
fair and equitable after considering the factors listed in section 6-2, and if 
the action serves the convenience of the Government. 

49 

 
 
C.  The reclassification of a position by OCCHCO to a lower grade range will 
result in a reduction in pay and pay will be set in accordance with the 
classification decision. Pay will be set according to the procedures detailed in 
section 6-2. No appeal of the reclassification decision or pay retention is 
permitted, subject to any applicable collective bargaining agreement. 

50 

 
 
 
7-1.  General 

CHAPTER 7:  BENEFITS 

A.  With certain exceptions that apply to individuals such as reemployed 

annuitants, CORE are eligible for Federal Employees Health Benefits (FEHB), 
Federal Employees Dental/Vision Insurance Program (FEDVIP), Federal 
Employees Group Life Insurance (FEGLI), Federal Employees Retirement 
System (FERS), Flexible Spending Account (FSA), Federal Long Term Care 
Insurance (FLTCIP), and participation in the Thrift Savings Plan (TSP). 

B.  COREs must review their benefit options and make selections within 

prescribed election periods. OCCHCO, Employee Services Division, will 
provide timely information to COREs with regard to available benefit options, 
election periods, and technical direction regarding how to apply for these 
options.  

C.  OCCHCO staff is prohibited from making any type of recommendation that 
may influence a CORE’s benefit election. COREs need to evaluate cost, 
personal needs, and eligible family members and their needs when preparing 
to make a benefits selection. 

D.  FEMA applies guidance contained within OPM Benefits Administration Letter, 
No. 13-203, when extending benefits to legally married same-sex spouses 
and common law marriages in certain states, of Federal employees and 
annuitants, and to the children of those marriages. 

7-2.  Health Benefits 

A.  COREs are given an opportunity to enroll in the Federal Employees Health 
Benefits Program (FEHB) at the time of appointment to a CORE position. 

B.  A CORE must decide whether to elect to enroll in FEHB within 60 days after 
the effective date of appointment. A CORE who elects to enroll must submit 
SF-2809 to his or her HR Specialist. A CORE who fails to return the 
completed form within the prescribed time frame, or who cancels enrollment 
will not have another opportunity to enroll until an FEHB open season is 
offered (generally once per year), or as a result of a Qualifying Life Event 
(QLE). 

C.  The CORE’s share of the premium for the benefits plan chosen will be 

deducted from the CORE’s bi-weekly pay on a pre-tax basis.  A CORE may 
cancel health benefits coverage during an extended period of non-pay status 
or may continue the coverage and pay the premium each pay period or upon 
return to pay status. Effective dates for enrollment, changes in enrollment, 
and cancellation of enrollment will be established in accordance with 
guidance prescribed by the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM). 

51 

 
 
7-3.  FEDVIP (Dental and Vision) Program 

A.  The Federal Employees’ Dental/Vision Program (FEDVIP) is a supplemental 
program offering vision and dental coverage to Federal employees, retirees, 
and their eligible family members on an enrollee-pay-all basis.  

B.  COREs, retirees, and their eligible family members are eligible to enroll in 

FEDVIP if they are eligible to enroll in FEHB and the CORE’s position is not 
excluded by law or regulation.10 COREs who are not enrolled in FEHB may 
still be eligible for FEDVIP, providing they are eligible to enroll in FEHB. 

C.  New and newly eligible COREs may enroll within 60 days after they become 
eligible. COREs may also enroll during the annual Federal Benefits Open 
Season in November and December. 

7-4.  Life Insurance 

Unless a CORE elects to waive coverage prior to the end of the pay period in 
which appointed, eligible COREs are automatically insured for basic life coverage 
on the day the CORE enters on duty in a pay status. Within 60 days after the 
effective date of appointment to a CORE position, a CORE who has basic life 
insurance coverage may also elect standard, additional, and/or family optional 
insurance. A CORE may decrease or waive all life insurance coverage at any 
time. Effective dates of life insurance coverage and waivers will be in accordance 
with the Federal Employees Group Life Insurance (FEGLI) program and OPM 
guidance. FEGLI is not included in the annual benefits open season and open 
season periods are rare. 

7-5.  Retirement 

A.  As a general rule, employees appointed to CORE positions are automatically 
covered by the Federal Employees Retirement System (FERS). Exceptions 
include certain former Federal employees who were hired prior to January 1, 
1984, and were covered under the Civil Service Retirement System (CSRS). 
Retirement coverage, whether FERS, CSRS, or CSRS Offset, begins on the 
effective date of appointment to a CORE position.  

B.  COREs who are covered by FERS, and first appointed: 

1.  Before 2013, contribute 0.8% of pay to the Civil Service Retirement and 

Disability Fund (CSRDF); 

2.  In 2013, contribute 3.1% of pay to the CSRDF; or 

3.  After December 31, 2013, contribute 4.4% of pay to the CSRDF. 

4.  Employee contributions to the CSRDF may change according to changes 

in the FERS program. 

10 See 5 C.F.R. § 894.302 or an HR Specialist to determine whether a position is excluded from 
FEDVIP. 

52 

 
 
 
 
                                                           
7-6.  Thrift Savings Plan 

A.  The Thrift Savings Plan (TSP) is a tax-deferred retirement savings and 

investment plan that provides COREs with an opportunity to save a portion of 
their income for retirement and reduce current taxes.  

B.  Eligibility for participation is determined by FEMA in accordance with law and 
TSP regulations published by the Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board. 

C.  COREs, covered by FERS, appointed after July 31, 2010, are automatically 

enrolled in the TSP. 

D.  COREs can elect, change their election, or stop their contributions at any time 
through the Employee Personal Page (EPP) or by completing and submitting 
a TSP-1 Election form. 

7-7.  Federal Long-Term Care Insurance Program 

Long-Term Care insurance provides financial protection to enrollees who are in 
need of assistance with their daily activities due to a lengthy or lifelong illness, 
injury, or cognitive impairment. Long-Term Care insurance is medically 
underwritten; therefore, a CORE and eligible family members must qualify for the 
insurance. Eligible COREs can enroll at any time; however, newly-hired COREs 
and their spouses receive a 60-day window to enroll using an abbreviated 
underwriting process. 

7-8.  Flexible Spending Accounts 

Flexible Spending Accounts (FSA) allows COREs to set aside money on a pre-
tax basis to cover out-of-pocket health care or dependent care expenses. A 
newly eligible CORE has 60 days from the date of his or her appointment to elect 
to set aside this money by payroll deduction. A CORE who wishes to participate 
or continue to participate from one plan year to the next must make a positive 
election during the annual open season, which runs concurrent with the health 
insurance open season. Changes can be made outside of the benefits open 
season as a result of a Qualifying Life Event (QLE). 

7-9.  Employee Assistance Program (EAP) 

COREs have access to confidential work life enhancement services through the 
EAP, free of charge. The EAP is a professional resource available to help 
COREs resolve life challenges. A CORE may call the toll-free EAP number at 1-
800-222-0364, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. A CORE can also access EAP 
services online at www.FOH4you.com. 

7-10.  Transit Subsidy Program 

Subject to the availability of funds, all COREs who are currently using public 
transportation to commute to work are eligible for transit subsidy benefits.  The 
Office of the Chief Administrative Officer (OCAO), Support Services and Facilities 
Management Division (SSFMD), administers the transit subsidy program. 

53 

 
 
 
 
 
COREs interested in receiving a transit subsidy must complete FEMA Form 254-
1-1, Public Transportation Benefit Program Application, and email it to the Transit 
Subsidy Program at FEMA-Transit-Subsidy@fema.dhs.gov.  

54 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 8:  PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT 

8-1.  General 

A.  CORE performance management shall comply with the Employee 

Performance Management Program as established by FM 255-1-1. 

B.  A CORE who receives a rating of unacceptable, or equivalent, on his or her 

most recent appraisal (rating of record) may be subject to removal in 
accordance with Chapter 11 of this Manual. Such removal should be effected 
regardless of the timing of the CORE’s NTE date. However, a supervisor is 
not precluded from terminating a CORE prior to issuance of a performance 
appraisal, so long as the supervisor has sufficient documentation to justify the 
action and has consulted with an OCCHCO Employee Relations Specialist. 

8-2.  Performance Management for CORE-Is 

The performance of IMAT members appointed as CORE-Is are subject to FD 
010-7, and are not covered by FEMA Manual 255-1-1 or this Chapter. 

8-3.  Deployment Performance Management 

A.  When deployed to a disaster for twenty days or more, a CORE qualified in a 
FQS position, and deployed to that position, will receive an evaluation of the 
CORE’s deployment performance by a temporary duty supervisor. The 
evaluation period consists of the entire time the CORE is deployed. 

B.  COREs will be evaluated on their performance based on the performance 

goals developed by Cadre Coordinators for each position within a Cadre. The 
goals will align with the position-specific knowledge of program and technical 
protocols contained in the position’s PTB, and the core competencies for 
deployed personnel. 

C.  The temporary duty supervisor will complete a deployment evaluation in a 
timely manner and transmit the evaluation to the CORE’s supervisor of 
record. Additionally, the HR Unit Leader and his or her staff will ensure that 
any demobilized CORE who is deployed for at least twenty days is issued a 
performance evaluation prior to departing the incident work site. 

D.  If a CORE’s deployment performance does not meet achieved expectations, 
the CORE’s supervisor of record in coordination with the Cadre Coordinator 
and/or temporary duty supervisor will collaborate with OCCHCO to determine 
the appropriate course of action. 

E.  A CORE’s progress review and appraisal (rating of record) should include 
input received after a deployment from the temporary duty supervisor. 
However, the supervisor of record has the discretion to consider the 
deployment performance evaluation as he or she deems appropriate when 
completing progress reviews and the annual appraisal (rating of record) 
subsequent to the deployment. 

55 

 
 
 
F.  If the CORE is deployed at the time that the CORE’s quarterly progress 

review should take place, the supervisor of record will work with the CORE 
and his or her temporary duty supervisor to obtain feedback on the CORE’s 
performance during the applicable quarter. 

56 

 
 
 
CHAPTER 9:  AWARDS AND RECOGNITION 

9-1.  Awards and Recognition Program 

The Awards and Recognition program applicable to Title 5 employees and 
captured in FEMA Manual 255-4-1 is also applicable to COREs, with the 
exception of CORE-Is. Awards and recognition policy applicable to CORE-I 
IMATs is found in FD 010-7. 

57 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 10:  SCHEDULING OF WORK AND TELEWORK 

10-1.  Scheduling of Work and Telework 

A.  FM 106-1-1, Scheduling of Work, applies to all COREs. To establish a work 

schedule a CORE must submit a copy of FEMA Form 106-1-1-1, Request for 
Work Schedule, to his or her supervisor of record for approval.  

B.  COREs will use FEMA approved timekeeping policies and procedures to 

account for all hours of work. 

C.  FM 123-9-1, Telework Manual, applies to all COREs. To establish a telework 
agreement and schedule a CORE must submit a copy of FEMA Form 123-9-
0-1, Telework Application and Agreement Form, and FEMA Form 123-9-0-2, 
Employee Self-Certification Safety and Health Checklist, to his or her 
supervisor of record for approval.  

D.  COREs whose Residence of Record is their permanent duty station are not 

teleworking when on duty. However, all COREs whose Residence of Record 
is their official duty station must have a completed and approved Employee 
Self-Certification Safety and Health Checklist forms on-file with FEMA prior to 
being permitted to work.  

58 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 11:  PROCEDURES FOR MISCONDUCT AND POOR PERFORMANCE 

11-1.  General 

A.  COREs are non-Title 5 employees and, therefore normally do not have 

appeal rights to the Merit Systems Protection Board. 

B.  Supervisors must communicate proper conduct and performance standards. 
Supervisors must also set an example for proper conduct and performance 
for their subordinates. 

C.   Supervisors must identify and deal with misconduct and unacceptable 

performance as they occur. 

D.  Supervisors must document problems as they occur and follow up with 

COREs to ensure they understand the seriousness of their behavior and/or 
performance deficiencies. Documentation does not have to be lengthy. It can 
be a brief summary of key facts and issues, with names, dates and times that 
the incident(s) occurred. This documentation must be created in a timely 
manner and preserved for potential litigation and may be subject to discovery.  

E.  Supervisors should immediately contact their servicing Employee Relations 

Specialist when misconduct or performance issues occur to obtain advice and 
guidance before taking any official action. If this issue involves misconduct, 
supervisors must report the matter as required by FD 123-19, paragraph III.D.  

F.  When making a determination of lack of fitness to encumber a FEMA position, 
or that the CORE’s security clearance is being suspended or revoked under 
DHS Instruction 121-01-007, OCSO shall immediately notify Employee 
Relations. 

11-2.  Addressing Misconduct 

A.  Misconduct must be reported to FEMA HQ in accordance with FD 123-19, 

Administrative Investigations Directive (AID), and, depending on the status of 
the CORE and the alleged misconduct, to the DHS OIG. It can be difficult to 
determine whether a CORE’s actions constitute misconduct or poor 
performance, or whether suspected misconduct triggers the requirements to 
report the suspected misconduct to DHS OIG or the AID Committee. As such, 
consultation with OCCHCO is critical to determining the proper course of 
action. The Employee Relations Specialist will recommend the appropriate 
option and provide the required documentation to the manager for issuance to 
the CORE. FD 123-19 and its accompanying Manual, FM 123-19-1, provide 
procedures for reporting misconduct and investigating it prior to determining if 
disciplinary action for any substantiated misconduct is to be recommended. 

B.  Options to Address Misconduct 

1.  Counseling. A counsel is an informal verbal advisement by a supervisor 
to a CORE of misconduct that must be corrected, yet which avoids any 
lasting adverse effect on a CORE’s personnel record. The purpose of 
counseling is to correct misconduct problems soon after they occur in 

59 

 
 
order to prevent the need for formal discipline. Counseling is an 
appropriate response to minor misconduct when the CORE has a 
generally good record, with no prior instances of misconduct, and is 
committed to correcting the problem. Documentation is not required; 
however, a follow-up e-mail recounting the conversation entitled 
“Discussion dated XX” can be provided to the CORE and is strongly 
recommended. At a minimum the supervisor shall send an email to 
himself or herself to document the content of the conversation. Counseling 
can be used to demonstrate that the CORE was put on notice about the 
problem and knew of the potential for a harsh penalty if the problem 
continued. A memorandum documenting the counseling is not placed in 
the CORE’s Official Personnel Folder (OPF). 

2.   Reprimand. A written reprimand is the lowest level of formal discipline 
addressed to the CORE and signed by the immediate supervisor (or 
higher level supervisor in the chain of command). Depending on the 
severity of the misconduct, it may be appropriate for a first offense of 
misconduct, when written formal discipline is necessary or, when verbal 
counseling has been ineffective in correcting misconduct. The reprimand 
should include, as a minimum, the following information: 

i.  Reference previous counseling or other action that was relied on to 

support the action (if any); 

ii.  Advise the CORE of any applicable appeal rights, such as the right to 
file an appeal with the next higher level supervisor within five calendar 
days after receipt of the reprimand; 

iii.  Advise the CORE of the potential negative consequences of future 

misconduct; 

iv.  Advise the CORE of Employee Assistance Program (EAP) services 

available to assist with any work-related or personal concerns that may 
have an impact on performance and/or behavior at work; 

v.  Inform the CORE of the Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) Program 
and of his or her right to seek counseling with an EEO advisor if he or 
she believes the reprimand is based on a prohibited factor; 

vi.  State whether a copy of the reprimand will be placed in the CORE’s 

OPF, which may be for a period not to exceed 3 years; 

vii. Identify the servicing Employee Relations Specialist to contact for 

questions concerning the reprimand; and  

viii. Provide a signature line upon which the CORE will acknowledge 

receipt of the notice of reprimand. 

3.  Suspension. A suspension temporarily removes the CORE from the 

performance of duties without pay for a specified period, and is recorded 
in the CORE’s official personnel record. A notice of suspension is a 
memorandum on FEMA letterhead, addressed to the CORE, and signed 

60 

 
by the immediate supervisor (or higher level supervisor in the chain of 
command. 

i. 

 The supervisor of record forwards a copy of the notice (signed and 
dated by the supervisor) and the SF-52 to the Employee Relations 
Specialist. The Specialist codes the SF-52 and forwards it to the 
OCCHCO for processing. 

ii.   The notice of a suspension should include, as a minimum, the 

following information: 

a.  Identify the specific charge(s), supporting information, regulations 

or policies violated; 

b.  Identify the effective date of the action; 

c.  Advise the CORE of any applicable appeal rights, such as the right 
to appeal the suspension to the next-higher level supervisor within 
five calendar days of receipt of the notice, and of the CORE’s right 
to file a grievance under any applicable collective bargaining 
agreement; 

d.  Inform the CORE of his or her right to seek counseling with an EEO 

advisor if he or she believes the suspension is based on a 
prohibited factor; 

e.  Advise the CORE how to contact the EAP to assist with any work-
related or personal concerns that may have an impact on the 
CORE’s conduct at work; 

f.  Provide the name and telephone number of the servicing Employee 
Relations Specialist whom the CORE may contact for questions; 
and 

g.  Provide a signature line upon which the CORE will acknowledge 

receipt of the notice of suspension. 

4.  Removal from Federal Service. A removal from federal service is 

recorded in the CORE’s personnel record, and is the most severe form of 
discipline available to a manager. Removal may be appropriate when the 
facts and supporting information cause the supervisor to conclude that the 
CORE has demonstrated an unwillingness or refusal to conform to 
acceptable standards of conduct, a lesser penalty would not deter future 
misconduct, or there is little probability of the CORE’s rehabilitation.  

i.  A notice of removal is a memorandum on FEMA Letterhead addressed 
to the CORE from the immediate supervisor (or higher level supervisor 
in the chain of command). The notice should include the same items 
identified in section 11-2.B.3.ii. (Content of a suspension notice). 

ii.  The CORE’s immediate supervisor, or any higher-level supervisor in 

the CORE’s chain of command, should give the notice to the CORE at 
or before the effective date of the notice and request that the CORE 

61 

 
acknowledge receipt at the bottom of the last page of the notice. If the 
CORE refuses to sign the notice acknowledging receipt, the supervisor 
should place a note on the last page to indicate that the notice was 
given to the CORE and the CORE refused to acknowledge receipt. 
Failure to acknowledge receipt has no impact on implementation of the 
decision. 

5.  Removal Based on a Determination of Lack of Fitness for a FEMA 
Position. All COREs must meet fitness standards established in DHS 
Instruction 121-01-007. 

i.  OCSO has the authority to determine a CORE’s fitness, based on a 
background investigation at the time of entry on duty and every five 
years thereafter (or more frequently as circumstances warrant). 

ii.  When OCSO has determined that a CORE does not meet the fitness 
standard, in accordance with the procedures in DHS Instruction 121-
01-007, OCSO shall notify OCCHCO/Employee Relations, which shall 
coordinate with the CORE’s supervisor and OCSO to deny the CORE 
unescorted access to DHS/FEMA facilities. In addition, DHS Sensitive 
Systems Policy Directive 4300A requires that DHS employees have a 
favorably adjudicated background investigation to be granted access to 
DHS Information Technology systems. Therefore, COREs who do not 
meet the fitness standard are normally required to turn in their FEMA 
equipment (e.g., laptop, Blackberry, etc.) and are placed on non-duty, 
non-pay status. The CORE may request to use any available accrued 
leave during this period. 

iii.  With the concurrence of OCCHCO/Employee Relations and the Office 
of Chief Counsel, the supervisor of record issues a removal decision to 
a CORE under his or her supervision deemed unfit to encumber a 
FEMA position. The notice should include the same items identified in 
section 11-2.B.3.ii. (content of a suspension notice).  

iv.  The removal decision shall include the right to appeal within five 

calendar days after the removal is effective. Appeals from removal 
decisions are decided by the Associate or Deputy Associate 
Administrator, Mission Support. 

6.  Recovery of Government Equipment. Supervisors shall collect all 
government equipment prior to the effective date of the removal. 

11-3.  Addressing Poor Performance 

CORE supervisors and managers should consult FM 255-1-1, Employee 
Performance Management Program, for more information on dealing with poor 
performance. Most performance problems can be resolved through effective 
communication between the supervisor and CORE. The supervisor should, at a 
minimum, take the following steps: 

62 

 
 
A.  Discuss performance deficiencies with any CORE whose performance is 

substandard. This discussion provides the supervisor the opportunity to clarify 
job expectations, and to identify performance deficiencies. It provides the 
CORE with clear direction as to what he or she needs to do to improve his or 
her performance to an acceptable level. The supervisor should document the 
discussion and provide the CORE with a copy of the documentation to 
prevent misunderstandings, or mischaracterization of the discussion.  

B.  Monitor the CORE’s performance following the discussion, and document the 

CORE’s progress toward improving his or her performance. 

C.  The supervisor must discuss the CORE’s performance deficiencies with the 
Employee Relations Specialist for guidance on (1) whether to remove a 
CORE for substandard performance immediately or (2) to provide the CORE 
time to demonstrate improvement, and if so, the length of time to do so. A 
“performance expectations” memorandum is a helpful tool that the supervisor 
can issue to the CORE. The Employee Relations Specialist will assist the 
supervisor with drafting any correspondence regarding performance 
problems. The supervisor will provide the Specialist with a signed and dated 
copy of the final document. The supervisor must document the deficiencies 
with memoranda, emails, work products and any other documentation that 
demonstrates the deficiencies. COREs are not placed on formal Performance 
Improvement Plans (PIPs). 

D.  Removal from Federal Service. 

1.  A removal from federal service is recorded in the CORE’s personnel 

record, and is the most severe form of discipline available to a manager. A 
notice of removal is a memorandum on FEMA Letterhead addressed to 
the CORE from the immediate supervisor (or higher level supervisor in the 
chain of command). 

2.  The notice should include the same items identified in section 11-2.B.3.ii 

(content of a suspension notice). 

3.  The CORE’s immediate supervisor, or any higher-level supervisor in the 

CORE’s chain of command, must give the notice to the CORE at or before 
the effective date of the notice and request that the CORE acknowledge 
receipt at the bottom of the last page of the notice. If the CORE refuses to 
sign the notice acknowledging receipt, the supervisor should place a note 
on the last page to indicate that the notice was given to the CORE and the 
CORE refused to acknowledge receipt. Failure to acknowledge receipt 
has no impact on implementation of the decision. 

E.  In rare circumstances, the supervisor may initiate a reassignment to another 
position in a lower pay band or IC pay grade, whichever is applicable, in lieu 
of removal, to address poor performance after receiving concurrence from the 
Employee Relations Specialist and the Office of Chief Counsel. In such 
circumstances, the CORE’s rate of pay will be reduced in accordance with 
Chapters 5 and 6. 

63 

 
11-4.  Deployment Scenarios 

COREs may be assigned to perform incident management and incident support 
duties based on the operational needs of FEMA and subject to the policies 
contained within FD 010-8, FEMA Incident Workforce Deployment. During 
deployment, supervisors of record receive feedback on the performance of 
COREs during deployments from the CORE’s temporary duty supervisors. 
Temporary duty supervisors provide day-to-day supervision of the performance 
of deployed COREs. 

A.  Temporary duty supervisors must consult with the supervisor of record and  

OCCHCO/Employee Relations Branch when they encounter poor 
performance, and provide all documents to the supervisor of record. 

B.   Temporary duty supervisors who become aware of allegations of misconduct 
shall notify the supervisor of record of the allegation. The supervisor of record 
shall consult with OCCHCO/Employee Relations before initiating disciplinary 
action. The supervisor of record will notify the temporary duty supervisor of 
any impending disciplinary action. In all cases in which misconduct is alleged, 
the Employee Relations Branch shall provide advice to the Federal 
Coordinating Officer (FCO) and the supervisor of record as to the propriety of 
the following options: 

1.  Releasing the CORE from the deployment into a non-duty, non-pay status; 

2.  Releasing the CORE and returning him or her to the official duty station, or  

3.  Keeping the CORE deployed pending completion of any needed 

investigation or issuance of disciplinary action. 

C.  If the supervisor of record and FCO disagree whether to demobilize the 

CORE, the issue will be resolved by the Associate Administrator of Response 
and Recovery. 

11-5.  Arrest, Indictment, and other Allegations of Misconduct 

A.  FEMA may receive information that a CORE has been arrested, indicted for a 

crime, used an illegal drug, or has allegedly committed other serious 
misconduct. Supervisors may learn of this information in a variety of ways, 
including the CORE’s self-report or via other employees, the Office of the 
Chief Security Office (OCSO), or press reports. Upon receipt of such 
information, the supervisor of record, FCO, or temporary duty supervisor shall 
contact Employee Relations for guidance. 

B.  If the CORE is incarcerated or otherwise unable to come to work, the 

supervisor must first address the leave status. COREs may use available 
leave, if requested and approved by the supervisor. If the request is denied, 
the CORE shall be placed in a non-duty, non-pay status. The supervisor is 
not obligated to approve a leave request submitted by the CORE. 

64 

 
 
 
C.  If the CORE is available for duty following arrest, or, if not arrested, but is 
under investigation for alleged misconduct, the following factors must be 
considered in determining whether the CORE shall be permitted to return to 
duty pending resolution of the criminal action or other serious misconduct: 

1.  If the CORE has a security clearance, OCSO, Personnel Security Division 

(PSD), may suspend a CORE’s security clearance upon receipt of 
adverse information, such as an arrest or indictment. If PSD suspends the 
CORE’s clearance, or revokes it, PSD shall notify ER. Normally, COREs 
would be placed in non-duty, non-pay status until a recommendation on 
removal can be made by ER to the supervisor of record. 

2.  For COREs without security clearances, OCSO must determine if the 

CORE is fit for continued employment. Thus, until OCSO has rendered a 
determination on the CORE’s fitness, the supervisor of record must 
determine whether the CORE should be allowed to continue to work 
(including telework), be placed in a non-duty, non-pay status or be 
terminated pending the outcome of the criminal case, considering the 
following factors after consultation with ER, OCC’s Personnel Law Branch, 
and OCSO: 

i.  What is the nature of the offense or other serious misconduct? The 
more serious the offense, the more likely that the CORE should not 
return to duty. 

ii.  What evidence is there as to the commission of the offense? The lack 
of corroboration or confession especially with a minor offense, may 
weigh in favor of the CORE’s retention on duty. 

iii.  Does the known evidence suggest that the CORE is a physical or 

logical security risk? 

iv.  Impact on the Mission: Are there other factors that indicate that the 

mission will be adversely affected if the CORE is returned to duty, such 
as notoriety? Is the offense known, causing perceived damage to a 
Directorate’s, Office’s, or JFO’s ability to conduct business or its 
credibility due to the CORE’s continued presence? 

3.  Authority to return the CORE to duty pending resolution of criminal 

matters: After consultation with ER, and subject to approval, if required, by 
the Office of Inspector General: 

i.  For COREs who are deployed, the FCO shall make the final decision 
as to whether the CORE shall remain at the JFO, after consultation 
with the supervisor of record (see section 11-4 for resolution of 
disputes on this matter between FCO and the supervisor of record). 

ii.  For COREs at their official duty station, the supervisor of record shall 
make the final decision as to whether the CORE shall return to duty. 

65 

 
 
11-6.  The Appeal Process 

A CORE who wishes to appeal a reprimand, suspension, or removal decision 
may do so in writing to his or her second level supervisor no later than 5:00 p.m. 
(the local time of the second level supervisor) on the fifth calendar day following 
the effective date of the disciplinary action. COREs included within collective 
bargaining units must follow the procedures for that unit. Oral appeals are not 
permitted. This appeal process is not applicable to non-disciplinary actions, such 
as right-sizing, demobilization, or the expiration of appointments. 

A.  The CORE may provide a narrative and any documentation that he or she 

considers relevant for the second level supervisor to consider prior to issuing 
his or her final decision. 

B.  The second level supervisor may gather additional documents that he or she 
deems necessary to make a final decision. The second level supervisor 
should complete any additional investigation within five working days of the 
receipt of a timely appeal and issue a decision within five working days after 
finishing an investigation. 

C.  The Employee Relations Specialist will review the written decision drafted by 
the second level supervisor prior to its issuance to the CORE. Additionally, 
the Employee Relations Specialist will gather and preserve any and all 
additional documents acquired by the second level supervisor to issue the 
final decision and the final decision itself. 

11-7.  Allegations of Discrimination 

If a CORE alleges discrimination to his or her supervisor, the CORE must be 
referred to the Office of Equal Rights for appropriate guidance on the EEO 
complaint process. The supervisor may contact the Office of Chief Counsel’s 
Personnel Law Branch with any questions concerning the EEO process. 

11-8.  Allegations of Fraud, Waste, Abuse, and Mismanagement 

Supervisors must not ignore allegations of fraud, waste, abuse, or 
mismanagement, and must take steps to inquire into the allegations or refer them 
to appropriate management officials for investigation. Allegations of misconduct 
against COREs at the IC-15 or equivalent level or higher must be referred to the 
Office of Inspector General (ref: DHS Management Directive 0810.1) for 
investigation. 

66 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 12:  RIGHTSIZING 

12-1.  General 

A.  COREs receive temporary appointments that do not confer eligibility or 

priority consideration for permanent appointment. They may be removed from 
Federal service at any time for poor performance, misconduct, reduction in 
work, or for other agency mission needs, so long as adequate documentation 
exists to justify the removal, and are not subject to protection afforded by 
reduction-in-force provisions or reemployment rights established under any 
statutory or regulatory provision.  

B.  When FEMA requires reductions in staff levels in one or more functional 

areas due to a lack of work or funding, FEMA may conduct a rightsizing of its 
CORE workforce. A rightsizing may occur when an Office or Directorate 
anticipates needing fewer positions through the annual workload analysis and 
staffing plan process, or if an immediate need to reduce positions or workload 
is realized between annual workload analyses. 

C.  Rightsizing results in termination of appointment prior to the expiration date of 
an appointment, unless the CORE is selected for or is reassigned to another 
vacant position in FEMA. 

D.  Rightsizing procedures should not be used to remove CORE employees due 

to poor performance or misconduct.  

E.  A Rightsizing does not occur when FEMA declines to renew a CORE’s 

appointment at the end of a CORE’s appointment term. 

F.  Program Areas shall be clearly defined, with appropriate justification, in the 

Plan. The Plan shall be in writing and approved by OCCHCO prior to 
implementation.  

12-2.  Rightsizing Plan 

A.  The second level supervisor, in coordination with OCCHCO, develops a 

Rightsizing Plan to affect the rightsizing procedures described in this Chapter 
that will impact the COREs under his or her supervisory authority. The Plan 
shall be in writing and approved by OCCHCO prior to implementation. 

B.  Based on the Office or Directorate’s most recent workload analysis and 

staffing plan, the second level supervisor will identify the activities that will 
cease to be performed or require an adjustment in the amount of time for 
performance. 

C.  Using this adjusted workload analysis, the supervisor or manager will develop 
a revised Staffing Plan for the positions under his or her authority that will 
propose the number of CORE positions by title, series, grade, and duty 
station that will continue to be needed. The remaining positions will be 
identified for rightsizing. 

67 

 
 
D.  The Rightsizing Plan will consist of the updated staffing plan, any Functional 

Area SMEs identified for retention (see section 12-4.B.), the proposed 
timeline for providing the general and specific notices of rightsizing to the 
affected COREs, and the proposed effective date of the rightsizing. 

12-3.  Notice 

The second level supervisor will issue both general and specific notice of 
upcoming rightsizing efforts. 

A.  General Advance Notice. COREs will be given a 30 calendar day advance 
official notification concerning decisions which may result in their being 
affected by a rightsizing effort. This notification will be in writing and will 
include: the reasons for the rightsizing effort, such as lack of work or funds, 
reorganization, or a realignment of functions; and, whom to contact about 
assistance available for affected employees. 

B.   Specific Notice. Specific written notice of separation will be issued to 

individual affected COREs prior to the proposed date of their release.  
FEMA’s goal is to provide notice no less than 30 calendar days from their 
date of release unless extenuating circumstances dictate a shorter notice 
period.  

12-4.  Retention Criteria 

Upon determining that rightsizing procedures are required, the second level 
supervisor, in consultation with OCCHCO, shall utilize the following criteria to 
determine the order in which COREs will be released. An incumbent will only be 
compared to other incumbents under the supervision of that second level 
supervisor. 

A.  Position. Identify (1) the affected area; (2) the existing positions staffing that 
area; and (3) pay levels within each position. Each position is reviewed and 
listed by pay and location, and positions are identified for retention based on 
lack of work or funds, reorganization, or a realignment of functions. The 
determination as to the number of needed positions to staff the reduced 
workforce must be documented in the Rightsizing Plan. 

Example. In this example, the program area is identified as “Applicant 
Services” and the existing positions are “Applicant Services Specialists.” 
There are currently 10 IC-12s, 15 IC-11s, and 15 IC-9s Applicant Services 
Specialist positions. The remaining work only requires 3 IC-12s, 10 IC-11s, 
and no IC-9s Applicant Services Specialists.11 Therefore, 7 IC-12s, 5 IC-11s, 
and all IC-9s will be released. Consequently, the second level supervisor 
must examine the incumbent IC-12s and IC-11s to determine who will fill the 

11 For this example, substitute the pay band numbers for grade level if the COREs with positions 
targeted for rightsizing are paid via an administratively-determined pay scale utilizing pay bands. 

68 

 
 
 
                                                           
remaining positions utilizing the following retention criteria. OCCHCO must 
approve this Plan prior to implementation. 

3 – Applicant 
Services 
Specialists, IC-
12 
10 – Applicant 
Services 
Specialist, IC-11 

Current Staffing  Needed  
10 – Applicant 
Services 
Specialists, IC-
12 
15 – Applicant 
Services 
Specialists, IC-
11 
15 – Applicant 
Service 
Specialists, IC-9 

0 – Applicant 
Services 
Specialists, IC-9 

Release 
7 – Applicant 
Services 
Specialists, IC-
12 
5 – Applicant 
Services 
Specialists, IC-
11 
15 –Applicant 
Services 
Specialists IC-9 

Remaining 
3 – Applicant 
Services 
Specialists, IC-
12 
10 – Applicant 
Services 
Specialists, IC-
11 
0 – Applicant 
Services 
Specialists, IC-9 

B.  Functional Area SME. To ensure accomplishment of mission objectives, the 
supervisor of a functional area subject to rightsizing procedures may identify 
one SME from the supervisor’s functional area that should be excluded from 
rightsizing procedures because of the SME’s subject matter expertise. Any 
request for a SME’s exclusion from rightsizing must be accompanied by a 
justification that establishes that a need exists for this SME position, and that 
the requested employee is most qualified for the SME position. This request 
must be approved by the supervisor’s chain of command with the final 
concurrence of the Head of the Office or Directorate, who will then inform 
OCCHCO of the SME designation and transmit to OCCHCO all documents 
justifying his or her selection. OCCHCO must review and approve the SME 
designation as part of the review of the Rightsizing Plan. A SME who is 
thereafter reassigned to a different functional area will lose his or her SME 
designation, thereby losing his or her exemption from rightsizing procedures. 

C.  Performance Evaluation. The second level supervisor will provide to 

OCCHCO the summary rating level of all COREs in positions that must be 
rightsized, based on their most recent annual performance appraisals. 
Incumbents will be released in inverse order of performance rating (lowest to 
highest). Normally, incumbents with summary rating levels of Achieved 
Excellence (or equivalent) will be excluded from release unless the total 
number of positions that must be released exceeds the number of incumbents 
who received a summary rating below Achieved Excellence (or equivalent).   

D.  Service Computation Date (SCD). If reviewing the performance evaluations 
of all COREs in positions that must be rightsized has not distinguished the 
incumbents for release from those who will be excluded from release for the 
current round of rightsizing, OCCHCO shall further review incumbents by 
SCD and shall identify those with the most recent SCDs for release.  

E.  Ties.  The official who would normally make the selection for the position from 

which the CORE is being released will determine, on the basis of 

69 

 
 
 
qualifications and competencies for the specific position, which employee(s) 
will be retained when two or more employees have identical service 
computation dates. The rationale for retention versus removal must be 
documented with the specific reasons for each decision. OCCHCO must 
review and approve the stated rationale. 

F.  Recovery Office Closure. 

1.  Some COREs will remain in their positions until the closure of the 

Recovery Office. 

2.  Upon the closure of the Recovery Office, the remaining COREs must have 

applied and been selected for a vacant FEMA position or they will be 
released from their employment with FEMA, using the notice procedures 
above. 

12-5.  Transitional Options for Released COREs 

CORE staff identified for release will not be automatically reassigned directly into 
vacant positions elsewhere in FEMA and must apply and be appointed through 
the hiring procedures identified in this Manual. COREs will be released from their 
current appointments for lack of work if, by the date of their release, they have 
not been selected for another vacant position within FEMA. The Director of the 
Recovery Office or the Head of the Office or Directorate may assist COREs 
identified for release with career transition, as appropriate, by arranging for 
assistance with resume writing and interview preparation. 

70 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 13:  ABSENCE AND LEAVE 

13-1.  Absence and Leave Policy 

FEMA administratively applies FM 3300.3, FEMA Absence and Leave Policy to 
COREs, with the exception of CORE-Is, whose absence and leave policies are 
governed by FD 010-7, Incident Management Assistance Team (IMAT) Program 
Directive.  

71 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 14:  TRAINING AND ETHICS 

14-1.  Training Provisions 

A.  The CORE and his or her supervisor of record share the responsibility for 

ensuring the CORE’s professional development. 

B.  OCCHCO, Employee Development Division, is responsible for drafting 

guidance on various topics, including but not limited to, continuing service 
agreements relating participation in employee development programs, 
supervisory training, and individual and executive development plans. 

C.  A CORE may be temporarily placed on a rotational assignment as part of a 
professional development program. In such circumstances, the duties and 
responsibilities performed by the CORE must be authorized under the 
Stafford Act. A CORE may be placed on a rotational assignment for up to 120 
days that may be renewed for one additional 120 day period. As the CORE 
IMAT program maintains its own professional development program, CORE 
IMATs are not eligible for rotational assignments. 

D.  Eligibility for training programs for a CORE paid via the grades and steps 

system is determined by the applicable grade and years of service 
requirement. Eligibility for training programs for a CORE paid via the pay 
band system is determined by comparing the current salary level of the 
CORE to the salary range of the GS levels eligible for the training program 
and the years of service requirement. The CORE will be eligible for a training 
program if the CORE’s salary is within the salary range of the GS employees 
eligible for the training and satisfying the years of service requirement. 

E.  IM COREs are eligible to participate in applicable leadership development 
programs so long as the training program does not have an impact on 
mission requirements. If an IM CORE is directed to deploy during a training 
program the CORE must deploy and may not finish the training program. 

F.  COREs participating in a leadership development program will be required to 
sign and comply with the terms of a three year Continuing Service Agreement 
(CSA). See Chapter 15, Continuing Service Agreements, for more 
information. 

14-2.  Ethics Requirements  

A.  All COREs are subject to the federal ethics laws and regulations, including 

the criminal conflict of interest statutes, the Standards of Ethical Conduct for 
Employees of the Executive Branch, and any supplemental ethics regulations 
promulgated by DHS. 

1.  Federal ethics laws and regulations apply to COREs at all times and may 

affect a CORE’s ability to seek and enter into outside employment. 

2.  A CORE’s outside employment may also create a real or apparent conflict 

of interest with his or her FEMA duties. 

72 

 
 
3.  COREs must be informed of these rules and regulations prior to hiring. 

B.  All COREs shall receive training in fraud detection and prevention, equal 

rights, privacy, and security. 

C.  All COREs must complete Initial Ethics Orientation provided by OCC Ethics 

within 90 days of their date of entry, in accordance with 5 C.F.R. § 2638.703. 

D.  Confidential financial disclosure filers must complete one hour of annual 

ethics training per calendar year, as required by 5 C.F.R. § 2638.705.  All 
other COREs must complete annual ethics training per FEMA policy. 

E.  All annual ethics training is provided by OCC Ethics. 

73 

 
 
 
CHAPTER 15:  CONTINUING SERVICE AGREEMENTS 

15-1.  Service Agreement 

A.  An applicant or CORE who receives a recruitment, relocation, or retention 

incentive is required to sign a two-year CSA prior to receiving the incentive. 
The Selecting Official or supervisor of record will preserve a signed copy of 
the service agreement and transmit a copy to OCCHCO. 

B.  A CORE participating in a leadership development program will be required to 

sign a three-year CSA. 

C.  A CORE must fulfill the terms of the CSA, including when the appointment is 

renewed for another appointment period. 

15-2.  Terminations of a CSA 

A.  If a CORE voluntarily separates from FEMA prior to completing the service 
obligation period, to begin employment with DHS Headquarters or another 
DHS Component, the CORE must give his or her supervisor of record at least 
30 days advance notice in writing, during which time the supervisor shall 
notify OCCHCO to transfer the remaining service obligation to the gaining 
agency. If the CORE separates from the Federal service or begins 
employment with another Federal agency, the CORE will be indebted to 
FEMA for the remaining service period. 

B.  A CORE who is demoted, removed from Federal service for misconduct or 
poor performance, or receives a rating of record lower than Achieved 
Expectations or equivalent, before fulfilling the terms of a CSA will be 
indebted to the Federal Government for the remaining service period.  

C.  Repayment is not required when a CORE is involuntarily separated for 
reasons other than misconduct or poor performance, or when the 
circumstances are otherwise beyond the CORE’s control. 

D.  A CSA may be unilaterally terminated by the head of an Office or Directorate 
based solely on management needs. Examples of discretionary removals 
include, but are not limited to, rightsizings or insufficient funds to continue 
planned payments. When a removal is based on management needs, the 
employee is entitled to all payments attributable to completed service and to 
retain any portion of a payment received that is attributable to uncompleted 
service. 

15-3.  Debt Recovery 

A.  When reimbursement is required, the repayment amount will be reduced on a 

pro rata basis for the percentage of completion of the obligated service 
period. 

B.  If a CORE’s appointment is not renewed, and the CORE is not appointed to a 

different position within FEMA, recovery is waived. 

74 

 
 
 
C.  An indebted CORE may request a waiver of any debt relating to a CSA to his 
or her Office or Directorate head. The Officer or Directorate head must send 
the request along with his or her recommendation through OCCHCO to the 
Administrator, who will render a written decision. Waivers in whole or in part 
will be rare and will be based on a determination that the recovery would be 
against equity and good conscience, or against the public interest. 

75 

 
FEMA MANUAL 123-10-1 
ABSENCE AND LEAVE 
APPROVAL DATE: 12/29/2015 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 

FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY 

OFFICE OF THE CHIEF COMPONENT HUMAN CAPITAL OFFICER 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Foreword 

This Manual provides guidance and policy direction for the administration, 
implementation, and oversight of the Federal Emergency Management Agency's 
(FEMA) Absence and Leave Program.  

FEMA’s absence and leave rules are an important tool to recruit and retain a highly 
skilled and motivated workforce. Employees are encouraged to make full use of their 
earned leave for rest and relaxation, recuperation from sicknesses or injuries, meeting 
the health and wellness needs of family members, and to fulfill civic obligations. 

FEMA’s leave benefits are determined by laws, regulations, and executive orders 
governing the leave system for Federal employees. Some of the applicable laws, 
regulations, and executive orders give FEMA discretion to authorize certain leave 
benefits, in whole or in part, this Manual details FEMA’s decision on exercising its 
discretion regarding the application of leave benefits. This Manual provides a complete 
listing of all types of leave authorized by FEMA’s absence and leave rules. 

While FEMA supports employees utilizing all forms of leave authorized by this policy, 
managers and employees must ensure the proper use of leave. Excessive use of leave 
has a detrimental effect on FEMA and the Federal service by delaying or preventing 
FEMA’s mission objectives, increasing the work assignments for other employees, and 
providing reduced or unsatisfactory service to the public. FEMA’s leave rules are 
designed to balance the needs of FEMA, employees, and the public. 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 

Foreword ......................................................................................................................... 1 

 GENERAL INFORMATION ...................................................................... 6 

1-1.  Purpose ................................................................................................................ 6 

1-2.  Applicability and Scope ........................................................................................ 6 

1-3.  Supersession ........................................................................................................ 6 

1-4.  Authorities/References ......................................................................................... 6 

1-5.  Policy .................................................................................................................... 7 

1-6.  Definitions ............................................................................................................. 8 

1-7.  Responsibilities ................................................................................................... 11 

1-8.  Forms Prescribed ............................................................................................... 13 

1-9.  Questions ........................................................................................................... 14 

 SCHEDULING OF WORK AND LEAVE ................................................ 15 

2-1.  Attendance ......................................................................................................... 15 

2-2.  Lunch or Meal Breaks ......................................................................................... 15 

2-3.  Tardiness ............................................................................................................ 15 

2-4.  Reporting for Duty Mission Ready ...................................................................... 15 

2-5.  Requests for Leave or Approved Absence ......................................................... 16 

2-6.  Deployment Availability ...................................................................................... 16 

2-7.  Use of Leave ...................................................................................................... 16 

2-8.  Compensatory Time Off ..................................................................................... 16 

2-9.  Compensatory Time Off for Travel ..................................................................... 17 

2-10.  Absences for Disabled Veterans ........................................................................ 17 

2-11.  Accommodation for Religious Exercise .............................................................. 18 

2-12.  Absence Without Leave ...................................................................................... 18 

 ANNUAL LEAVE .................................................................................... 19 

3-1.  Use of Annual Leave .......................................................................................... 19 

3-2.  Earning Rates for Annual Leave ......................................................................... 19 

3-3.  Advancing Annual Leave .................................................................................... 20 

3-4.  Maximum Accumulation of Annual Leave ........................................................... 21 

3-5.  Scheduling Annual Leave to Allow Potential Restoration ................................... 21 

3-6.  Restoration of Annual Leave .............................................................................. 21 

2 

 
 
3-7.  Annual Leave to Establish Retirement Eligibility ................................................. 22 

3-8.  Terminal Leave ................................................................................................... 22 

3-9.  Lump Sum Payment of Annual Leave ................................................................ 23 

 SICK LEAVE .......................................................................................... 25 

4-1.  Use of Sick Leave ............................................................................................... 25 

4-2.  Earning Rates for Sick Leave ............................................................................. 25 

4-3.  Requesting Sick Leave ....................................................................................... 26 

4-4.  Medical Certificates ............................................................................................ 26 

4-5.  Abuse of Sick Leave Privileges .......................................................................... 26 

4-6.  Advancing Sick Leave ........................................................................................ 27 

4-7.  Substitution of Sick Leave for Annual Leave ...................................................... 29 

4-8.  Sick Leave Used in the Computation of an Annuity ............................................ 29 

4-9.  Records on the Use of Sick Leave ..................................................................... 29 

 FAMILY MEDICAL LEAVE ACT ............................................................ 30 

5-1.  Leave Entitlement ............................................................................................... 30 

5-2.  Applicability and Eligibility ................................................................................... 31 

5-3.  Serious Health Condition .................................................................................... 31 

5-4.  Notice to Take Leave .......................................................................................... 32 

5-5. 

Intermittent or Reduced Leave Schedule ........................................................... 33 

5-6.  Substitution of Paid Leave .................................................................................. 33 

5-7.  Medical Certification and Supporting Documentation ......................................... 33 

5-8.  Continued Employment and Health Benefits ...................................................... 34 

5-9.  Return to Work ................................................................................................... 34 

5-10.  Records and Reporting ....................................................................................... 35 

 ABSENCE FOR MATERNITY AND PATERNITY .................................. 36 

6-1.  Eligibility and Use of Leave for Maternity and Paternity Reasons....................... 36 

6-2.  Leave Requests .................................................................................................. 36 

6-3.  Leave for Maternity Reasons .............................................................................. 37 

6-4.  Leave for Paternity Reasons .............................................................................. 37 

6-5.  Advance of Annual and/or Sick Leave ................................................................ 37 

6-6.  FMLA for Maternity and Paternity Purposes ....................................................... 38 

6-7.  VLTP for Maternity and Paternity Purposes ....................................................... 38 

6-8.  Adoption and Foster Care .................................................................................. 38 

3 

 
 COURT LEAVE ...................................................................................... 40 

7-1.  Eligibility and Use of Court Leave ....................................................................... 40 

7-2. 

Jury Duty ............................................................................................................ 40 

7-3.  Serving as a Witness .......................................................................................... 41 

7-4.  Court or Witness Fees ........................................................................................ 42 

7-5.  Court Leave and Other Leave Categories .......................................................... 43 

 MILITARY LEAVE .................................................................................. 44 

8-1.  Eligibility ............................................................................................................. 44 

8-2.  Use of Military Leave .......................................................................................... 44 

8-3.  Accumulation and Charging of Military Leave..................................................... 45 

8-4.  Military Leave (Regular) ..................................................................................... 46 

8-5.  Military Leave (Emergency) ................................................................................ 46 

 HOME LEAVE ........................................................................................ 48 

9-1.  Earning Home Leave .......................................................................................... 48 

9-2.  Use of Home Leave ............................................................................................ 49 

9-3.  Refund of Home Leave ....................................................................................... 50 

 EXCUSED ABSENCE .......................................................................... 51 

10-1.  Purpose of Excused Absences ........................................................................... 51 

10-2.  Time-Off Awards ................................................................................................. 51 

10-3.  Voting ................................................................................................................. 51 

10-4.  Absences to Take Examinations ........................................................................ 52 

10-5.  Absences for Job Required Medical Examinations ............................................. 53 

10-6.  Immediate Treatment of On-the-Job Injuries ...................................................... 53 

10-7.  Changes in Tour of Duty During Disasters ......................................................... 53 

10-8.  Emergency or Hazardous Weather Conditions................................................... 53 

10-9.  Veterans Attending Funeral Services ................................................................. 55 

10-10. Funerals of Immediate Relatives in the Armed Forces ....................................... 56 

10-11. Attending Funerals of Fellow Federal Law Enforcement Officers ....................... 56 

10-12. Return from Active Military Service ..................................................................... 56 

10-13. Notice Period Preceding a Reduction in Force ................................................... 57 

10-14. Health and Fitness Programs ............................................................................. 57 

10-15. Blood Donations ................................................................................................. 57 

10-16. Bone Marrow and Organ Donations ................................................................... 57 

4 

 
10-17. Absence to Perform Community Service ............................................................ 58 

10-18. Administrative Proceedings ................................................................................ 58 

10-19. Equal Employment Opportunity Complaints ....................................................... 58 

 LEAVE WITHOUT PAY ........................................................................ 60 

11-1.  Use of LWOP ...................................................................................................... 60 

11-2.  Required LWOP Situations ................................................................................. 60 

11-3.  Approving LWOP ................................................................................................ 61 

11-4.  LWOP for Family Obligations ............................................................................. 61 

11-5.  Extended Use of LWOP ..................................................................................... 61 

11-6.  Effect of LWOP on Employee Benefits ............................................................... 62 

 VOLUNTARY LEAVE TRANSFER PROGRAM .................................. 64 

12-1.  Program Description and Eligibility ..................................................................... 64 

12-2.  Application to be a Leave Recipient ................................................................... 64 

12-3.  Approval ............................................................................................................. 64 

12-4.  Transfer of Annual Leave ................................................................................... 65 

12-5.  Donations of Annual Leave ................................................................................ 65 

12-6.  Use of Transferred Annual Leave ....................................................................... 66 

12-7.  Accrual of Annual and Sick Leave ...................................................................... 66 

12-8.  Termination of the Medical Emergency .............................................................. 66 

12-9.  Restoration of Transferred Annual Leave ........................................................... 66 

12-10. Prohibition of Coercion ....................................................................................... 67 

 TRANSFER AND RECREDIT OF LEAVE ........................................... 68 

13-1.  Transfer of Leave ............................................................................................... 68 

13-2.  Recredit of Sick Leave ........................................................................................ 68 

APPENDIX A: LEAVE AT A GLANCE ......................................................................... 69 

APPENDIX B: HOME LEAVE ...................................................................................... 71 

APPENDIX C: LWOP ................................................................................................... 72 

5 

 
  
GENERAL INFORMATION 

1-1.  Purpose 

This Manual establishes the policies and procedures for FEMA’s absence and 
leave program. This Manual will provide managers and employees with guidance 
on the proper use of all types of leave authorized under FEMA policy. 

1-2.  Applicability and Scope 

The provisions of this Manual apply to all employees who meet the definition of 
“employee” under 5 U.S.C. § 2105. This Manual also applies to Cadre of On-Call 
Response/Recovery Employees (COREs) to the extent the CORE Manual (FM 
252-11-1) adopts the policies and procedures of this Manual. This Manual does 
not apply to Reservists. 

1-3.  Supersession 

This Manual supersedes FEMA Manual 3300.3, FEMA Absence and Leave 
Policy, issued July 31, 2001. 

1-4.  Authorities/References 

A.  Title 5, United States Code (U.S.C.) Chapter 63, Leave. 

B.  Title 5, U.S.C. Chapter 81, Compensation for Work Injuries. 

C.  Title 5, U.S.C. § 8339(m). 

D.  The Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993, Pub. Law No. 103-3, as 

amended, codified at 29 U.S.C. § 2601 et seq. 

E.  The Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act of 1994, 
Pub. Law No. 103-353, as amended, codified at 38 U.S.C. § 4301 et seq. 

F.  Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.) § 353.106, Personnel Actions 

During Employee’s Absence. 

G.  Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.) Part 550 Subpart J, Adjustment 

of Work Schedules for Religious Observances. 

H.  Title 5, C.F.R. Part 550 Subpart L, Lump-Sum Payment for Accumulated and 

Accrued Annual Leave. 

I.  Title 5, C.F.R. Part 550 Subpart N, Compensatory Time Off for Travel. 

J.  Title 5, C.F.R. Part 630, Absence and Leave. 

K.  Title 5, C.F.R. § 831.302. 

L.  Title 29, C.F.R. Part 825, The Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993. 

M.  Executive Order (E.O.) 5396, July 17, 1930. 

6 

 
 
 
 
N.  E.O. 13223, September 14, 2001. 

O.  Office of Personnel Management (OPM) Washington, DC, Area Dismissal 

and Closure Procedures, December 2014. 

P.  OPM Handbook on Leave and Workplace Flexibilities for Childbirth, Adoption, 

and Foster Care, April 2015. 

Q.  Department of Homeland Security (DHS) Interim Policy 112-10, The Proper 

Use of Administrative Leave.  

R.  FEMA Directive 010-8, FEMA Incident Workforce Deployment, October 16, 

2014. 

S.  FEMA Directive 119-6, Employee Physical Fitness Program, February 1, 

2012. 

T.  FEMA Manual 106-1-1, Scheduling of Work, March 5, 2014. 

U.  FEMA Manual 123-9-1, Telework, January 9, 2013. 

V.  FEMA Manual 141-1-1, Records Management: Files Maintenance and 

Records Disposition, March 7, 2014. 

W. FEMA Manual 252-11-1, Cadre of On-Call Response/Recovery Employee 

(CORE) Program, August 25, 2015. 

X.  FEMA Manual 253-2-1, Premium Pay, February 11, 2014. 

Y.  FEMA Manual 255-3-1, Employee Discipline, December 29, 2015. 

Z.  FEMA Manual 255-4-1, Employee Awards and Recognition, September 26, 

2013. 

1-5.  Policy 

A.  FEMA will utilize the discretion afforded by Federal absence and leave laws, 
regulations, and policies to limit the categories and use of leave to balance 
the needs of FEMA to complete its assigned missions with recruiting and 
retaining a highly skilled and motivated workforce. 

B.  FEMA must be ready at all times to respond to all disasters and meet the 

needs of the public with the necessary workforce. 

C.  Managers and supervisors will implement FEMA’s absence and leave policies 

in a fair and consistent manner. 

D.  Employees are required to report to work on time according to their approved 
work schedules and be available during FEMA’s core business hours to 
complete assignments, respond to co-workers, and meet the needs of the 
public. 

E.  Employees are encouraged to make use of their leave privileges for rest, 

relaxation, accomplishing personal business, seeking health or medical care, 
and recovering from sicknesses and injuries. Providing effective leave options 

7 

 
 
allows FEMA to recruit and retain high quality employees, increase employee 
engagement, and improve morale. 

F.  FEMA offers a variety of leave options and workplace flexibilities to allow 

employees to satisfy their work responsibilities and meet the needs of family 
members due to illnesses, injuries, and childbirth. 

G.  FEMA supports employees fulfilling their military commitments when called to 
active service. FEMA will make every effort to support veterans returning to 
civilian life and/or seeking treatment for service related injuries and illnesses 
through the absence and leave program. 

H.  Employees will use legitimately earned leave appropriately according to the 

policies and procedures detailed by this Manual. Employees and supervisors 
will be mindful of the effect improper use of leave has on FEMA’s ability to 
complete its mission, fellow employees, and public perception of the Federal 
service. 

1-6.  Definitions 

A.  Adoption. The legal process in which an individual becomes the legal parent 

of another’s child. 

B.  Armed Forces. The Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, and Coast Guard. 

C.  Core Hours. The designated period of the day an employee must be present 

at work. FEMA’s designated core hours are 9:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. 

D.  Domestic Partner. An adult in a committed relationship with another adult, 

including both same-sex and opposite-sex relationships.  

E.  Essential Functions. The fundamental job duties of the employee’s position. 

F.  Family Member. An individual who is the employee’s spouse, and parent of 

that spouse; a son or daughter, and spouse or domestic partner  of the son or 
daughter; the employee’s parent, and parent’s spouse or domestic partner; 
the employee’s brother or sister and their spouse or domestic partner; the 
employee’s grandparent or grandchildren, and their spouse or domestic 
partner; domestic partner, and the partner’s parents; or any individual related 
by blood or affinity whose close association with the employee is the 
equivalent of a family relationship. 

G.  Foster Care. Providing 24-hour care for children in substitution for, and away 
from, their parents or guardian. Such legal placement is made by or with the 
agreement of the State as a result of a voluntary agreement by the parent or 
guardian that the child be removed from the home, or pursuant to a judicial 
determination of the necessity for foster care, and involves agreement 
between the State and foster family to take the child. 

H.  Health Care Provider. A licensed Doctor of Medicine or Doctor of Osteopathy; 

any health care provider recognized by the Federal Employees Health 
Benefits Program or who is licensed or certified under Federal or State law to 

8 

 
 
provide the service in question; a health care provider as defined in part 2 of 
this definition who practices in a country other than the United States, who is 
authorized to practice in accordance with the laws of that country, and who is 
performing within the scope of his or he practice as defined under such law; a 
Christian Science practitioner listed with the First Church of Christ, Scientist, 
in Boston, Massachusetts; or a Native American, including an Eskimo, Aleut, 
and Native Hawaiian, who is recognized as a traditional healing practitioner 
by native traditional religious leaders who practices traditional healing 
methods as believed, expressed, and exercised in Indian religion of the 
American Indian, Eskimo, Aleut, and Native Hawaiians. 

I.  Home Leave. Leave earned by service abroad for use in the United States, 
the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, or in the territories or possessions of the 
United States. 

J.  Immediate Relative. See definition of a family member. 

K.  Incapacity. The inability to work, attend school, or perform other regular daily 
activities because of a serious health condition or treatment for or recovery 
from a serious health condition. 

L.  Intermittent Leave. Leave taken in separate blocks of time, rather than for one 
continuous period of time, and may include leave periods of 1 hour to several 
weeks.  

M.  In loco parentis. An individual who has day-to-day responsibility for the care 
and financial support of a child or, in the case of an employee, who had such 
responsibility for the employee when the employee was a child. A biological 
or legal relationship is not necessary. 

N.  Leave Donor. An employee whose voluntary written request for transfer of 

annual leave to the annual leave account of a leave recipient is approved by 
FEMA. 

O.  Leave Recipient. A current employee for whom FEMA has approved an 

application to receive annual leave from the annual leave accounts of one or 
more leave donors.  

P.  Leave Without Pay (LWOP). An absence from duty in a non-pay status. 

Leave without pay may be taken only for those hours of duty comprising an 
employee’s basic workweek. 

Q.  Leave Year. The period beginning with the first day of the first complete pay 

period in a calendar year and ending with the day immediately before the first 
day of the first complete pay period in the following calendar year. 

R.  Medical Certificate. A written statement signed by a registered practicing 

physician or other practitioner certifying to the incapacitation, examination, or 
treatment, or to the period of disability while the patient was receiving 
professional treatment. 

S.  Medical Emergency. A medical condition of an employee or a family member 
of such employee that is likely to require an employee’s absence from duty for 

9 

 
a prolonged period of time and to result in a substantial loss of income to the 
employee because of the unavailability of paid leave.  

T.  Month. A period which runs from a given day in one month through the date 

preceding the numerically corresponding day in the next month. 

U.  Office or Directorate. Offices or Directorates that are at or above Level three 

in FEMA’s organizational structure: Office of the Administrator, Office of Chief 
Counsel, Office of the Chief Financial Officer, Office of External Affairs, Office 
of Policy and Program Analysis, Office of Response and Recovery, Response 
Directorate, Recovery Directorate, Logistics Management Directorate, 
Protection and National Preparedness, National Preparedness Directorate, 
National Continuity Programs Directorate, Grant Program Directorate, Mission 
Support, Office of the Chief Administrative Officer, Office of the Chief 
Component Human Capital Officer, Office of the Chief Information Officer, 
Office of the Chief Procurement Officer, Office of the Chief Security Officer, 
Federal Insurance and Mitigation Administration, Federal Insurance 
Administration (FIA) Mitigation, FIA Insurance, United States Fire 
Administration, and Offices of Regional Administrators. 

V.  Parent. A biological, adoptive, step, or foster parent of the employee, or a 

person who was a foster parent of the employee when the employee was a 
minor; a person who is the legal guardian of the employee or was the legal 
guardian of the employee when the employee was a minor or required a legal 
guardian; or a person who stands in loco parentis to the employee or stood in 
loco parentis to the employee when the employee was a minor or required 
someone to stand in loco parentis. 

W. Reduced Leave Schedule. A work schedule under which the usual number of 
hours of regularly scheduled work per workday of an employee is reduced. 
The number of hours by which the daily or weekly tour of duty is reduced are 
counted as leave for FMLA purposes. 

X.  Serious Health Condition. An illness, injury, impairment, or physical or mental 
condition that involves: inpatient care (i.e., an overnight stay) in a hospital, 
hospice, or residential medical care facility, including any period of incapacity 
or any subsequent treatment in connection with such inpatient care; or 
continuing treatment by a health care provider that includes (but is not limited 
to) examinations to determine if there is a serious health condition and 
evaluations of such conditions if the examinations or evaluations determine 
that a serious health condition exists.  

Y.  Service Abroad. Service by an employee at a post of duty outside the United 
States and outside the employee’s place of residence if his or her place of 
residence is in the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico or a territory or possession 
of the United States. 

Z.  Son or Daughter. A biological, adopted, step, or foster son or daughter of the 
employee; a person who is a legal ward or was a legal ward of the employee 
when that individual was a minor or required a legal guardian; a person for 

10 

 
whom the employee stands in loco parentis or stood in loco parentis when 
that individual was a minor or required someone to stand in loco parentis; or a 
son or daughter of an employee’s spouse or domestic partner. 

AA.  Substantial Loss of Income. An absence (or expected absence) of at least 
24 work hours for a full-time employee which is not covered by available paid 
leave. 

BB.  Uncommon Tour of Duty. An established tour of duty that exceeds 80 

hours of work in a biweekly pay period, provided the tour: 

1.  Includes hours for which the employee is compensated by standby duty 

pay under 5 U.S.C. § 5545(c)(1) and 5 C.F.R. § 550.141; 

2.  Is a regular tour of duty established for firefighters compensated under 5 

U.S.C. § 5545b and 5 C.F.R. Part 550, Subpart M; or  

3.  Is authorized for a category of employees by the Office of Personnel 

Management. 

1-7.  Responsibilities 

A.  FEMA Administrator is responsible for: 

1.  Providing oversight and guidance on FEMA’s absence and leave policies; 

and 

2.  Sponsoring or approving community or volunteer service projects. 

B.  Office of the Chief Component Human Capital Officer (OCCHCO) is 

responsible for: 

1.  Developing and maintaining absence and leave policies and procedures; 

2.  Providing advice and guidance regarding the use of absence and leave; 

3.  Issuing instructions governing the creation and maintenance of time and 

attendance records; 

4.  Providing advice and assistance to address misconduct issues; 

5.  Reviewing and approving requests to require medical certification for an 
employee to return to work after a period of absence under FMLA; 

6.  Approving requests for LWOP as appropriate; 

7.  Reviewing and approving applications for donated leave under the VLTP; 

8.  Transferring or processing employee leave balances; and 

9.  Maintaining records and providing reports on FEMA’s absence and leave 

program. 

C.  Heads of Offices and Directorates are responsible for: 

11 

 
 
1.  Ensuring at least seventy-five percent of full-time employees with Incident 
Management (IM) or Incident Support (IS) titles are deployed or available 
to deploy in response to disasters or other emergencies; 

2.  Approving or denying the cancellation of previously approved annual 

leave; 

3.  Approving or denying the restoration of forfeited annual leave; 

4.  Approving or denying administrative leave in emergency situations; and 

5.  Approving or denying requests for LWOP as appropriate. 

D.  Supervisors are responsible for: 

1.  Establishing and approving work schedules; 

2.  Communicating proper procedures to employees for requesting an 

absence from work; 

3.  Approving or disapproving employee leave requests according to 

operational needs; 

4.  Approving or disapproving employee time and attendance records; 

5.  Monitoring employee attendance; 

6.  Charging employees with AWOL as appropriate; 

7.  Taking appropriate corrective or disciplinary actions if employees fail to 

follow established leave procedures; 

8.  Reviewing and approving requests for restoring forfeited annual leave; 

9.  Consulting with OCCHCO on whether to require medical certification 

before an employee can return to work after an absence under FMLA; 

10. Approving requests for LWOP as appropriate; and 

11. Reviewing and approving applications for donated leave under the VLTP. 

E.  Timekeepers are responsible for: 

1.  Properly accounting and accurately documenting employee time and 

attendance; and 

2.  Conducting leave audits. 

F.  Employees are responsible for: 

1.  Reporting for duty according to his or her approved work schedule and 

being available for work during FEMA’s core business hours; 

2.  Accurately accounting for all periods of work and leave; 

3.  Submitting requests for leave as early as possible; 

4.  Notifying his or her supervisor as early as possible if he or she will be 

unable to report to duty on time as scheduled; 

12 

 
5.  Complying with internal office or directorate procedures for requesting 

leave; 

6.  Obtaining supervisory approval for leave requests prior to taking leave, 
except in rare circumstances when it is not possible to give advance 
notice; 

7.  Complying with FEMA’s absence and leave rules and not abusing his or 

her leave rights; 

8.  Requesting the restoration of forfeited annual leave when appropriate; 

9.  Supplying sufficient documentation to support absences related to sick, 

court, or military leave; 

10. Requesting and providing sufficient notice to his or her supervisor to take 

leave under FMLA as appropriate; 

11. Submitting sufficient documentation to support leave taken under FMLA; 

12. Providing medical certifications that the employee is able to perform the 
essential functions of his or her position after a period of FMLA leave if 
requested; 

13. Providing sufficient notice and documentation in support of absences 

associated with childbirth, adoption, or foster care; 

14. Requesting and gaining approval for annual and administrative leave 
before using any period of administrative leave or excused absence; 

15. Maintaining awareness of local weather conditions, and retaining sufficient 

work and equipment necessary to continue working according to any 
applicable telework agreement in the event of an office closure; 

16. Supplying sufficient documentation to apply for leave donations; and 

17. Properly using any donated leave through the VLTP. 

G.  COREs are responsible for working at a Directed Work Location if directed by 

a supervisor or other properly designated FEMA official. 

1-8.  Forms Prescribed 

A.  OPM 630, Application to Become a Leave Recipient Under the Voluntary 

Leave Transfer Program. 

B.  OPM 630A, Request to Donate Annual Leave to Leave Recipient Under the 

Voluntary Leave Transfer Program (Within Agency). 

C.  OPM 630B, Request to Donate Annual Leave Recipient Under the Voluntary 

Leave Transfer Program (Outside Agency). 

D.  OPM 630C, Transfer of Leave Records for Leave Recipient Covered by the 

Voluntary Leave Transfer Program. 

13 

 
 
E.  OPM 1637, Application to Become Recipient Under the Emergency Leave 

Transfer Program. 

F.  OPM 1638, Request to Donate Annual Leave Under the Emergency Leave 

Transfer Program. 

G.  OPM 1639, Transfer of Donated Annual Leave To/From the Emergency 

Leave Transfer Program. 

H.  SF-52, Request for Personnel Action. 

I.  WH-380-E, FMLA Medical Certification Form for Employee’s Serious Health 

Condition. 

J.  WH-380-F, FMLA Medical Certification Form for Family Member’s Serious 

Health Condition. 

K.  WH-384, FMLA Certification for Qualifying Exigency. 

1-9.  Questions 

Questions concerning absence and leave policies and procedures should be 
addressed to the Office of the Chief Component Human Capital Officer at (202) 
212-3962. 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
SCHEDULING OF WORK AND LEAVE 

2-1.  Attendance 

FEMA has core business hours from 9:30 am to 3:30 pm (see FM 106-1-1, 
Scheduling of Work). Employee work schedules must include FEMA’s core 
business hours. Employees are expected to report for work on time and to be on 
duty at all times during their regularly scheduled tour of duty except during lunch 
periods and approved absences. 

2-2.  Lunch or Meal Breaks 

Employees who work at least five consecutive hours are entitled to take an 
unpaid 30-minute lunch or meal break. Employee work schedules include a 30-
minute unpaid lunch or meal break during which employees are not permitted to 
work. The unpaid lunch or meal break may be extended up to an additional 30 
minutes at the discretion and permission of the supervisor, if the employee 
extends his or her workday by a corresponding amount. Employees may not take 
their lunch or meal break at the start or end of their work schedule. 

2-3.  Tardiness 

A.  Periods of tardiness may be approved after the tardiness occurs by the 

employee’s supervisor. Normally, annual leave or LWOP will be charged, in 
multiples of 15 minutes to cover such periods of tardiness. In rare instances 
of infrequent, unavoidable tardiness, the supervisor may excuse tardiness 
which does not exceed 30 minutes in a situation where an excused absence 
is warranted. 

B.  If the conditions or frequency of the tardiness do not warrant approval of 

leave, the tardiness may be charged to Absence Without Leave, in multiples 
of 15 minutes, to cover the period of absence. 

C.  Employees will not be required to work during these periods of leave. 

Normally, leave for the balance of the 15 minutes will be taken immediately 
following the tardiness. It may be taken later in the day, however, if more 
convenient to the office. This leave will not, however, be carried over beyond 
the day in which the tardiness occurs. 

D.  Repeated tardiness is a basis for disciplinary action. Please contact 

OCCHCO, Labor and Employee Relations for advice and assistance on 
disciplinary actions. 

2-4.  Reporting for Duty Mission Ready 

Employees must report to work mission ready. Employees who are issued FEMA 
equipment, such as laptops, PIV cards, and telephones, that is necessary to 
perform their duties, must report to their designated worksite with such 

15 

 
 
 
 
equipment according to their authorized duty schedule. If an employee reports to 
work without a piece of necessary equipment, the employee shall use accrued 
annual leave, credit hours, or compensatory time to retrieve the equipment. In 
lieu of using paid leave, supervisors may approve LWOP if the employee does 
not have accrued leave. In all cases, employees shall not be granted 
administrative leave with pay to retrieve missing equipment. If an employee does 
not report to work as scheduled on a reoccurring basis, the supervisor should 
consult with the servicing Employee Relations Specialist for guidance on how to 
account for the time needed to retrieve missing equipment and any other 
disciplinary options. 

2-5.  Requests for Leave or Approved Absence 

An employee who wishes to take leave is required to inform his/her supervisor in 
advance of the request. Employees should provide their supervisors with as 
much advanced notice as possible for leave requests. An employee who is 
unable to provide advance notice and finds themselves unable to report for duty 
shall notify his or her supervisor as soon as possible at the beginning of the work 
day to request leave. The request should include the day(s), what type of leave, 
the number of hours, and the specific hours (from-to) and be documented in 
WebTA. Note: Leave may not be approved, so it is in the interest of the 
employee to request leave with as much notice as possible. 

2-6.  Deployment Availability 

FEMA seeks to effectively and fairly deploy necessary personnel in response to 
disasters and other emergencies. To ensure sufficient personnel are available for 
deployments, heads of Offices and Directorates should plan to have at least 
seventy-five percent of their full-time employees with IM or IS titles deployed or 
available to deploy at all times.  

2-7.  Use of Leave 

FEMA encourages employees to make full use of their legitimate leave rights. 
While the accrual of leave is an employee benefit, the use of leave is subject to 
the specific requirements contained in applicable laws, regulations, and this 
Manual. Both the needs of the employee and the need to accomplish FEMA’s 
mission will be considered in arriving at decisions to approve or disapprove leave 
requests. Employees are not to abuse their leave rights and privileges. Abuse 
may be the basis for disciplinary action up to and including termination. 

2-8.  Compensatory Time Off 

An employee may choose to receive compensatory time off in lieu of payment for 
an equal amount of irregular or occasional overtime hours worked. See FEMA 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
Premium Pay Manual 253-2-1 for more information on earning compensatory 
time off.  

A.  Compensatory time must be used in 15-minute increments. 

B.  Compensatory time off must be used within 26 pay periods of the pay period 

in which it was earned. 

C.  Compensatory time off must be used prior to using annual leave, except after 

pay period 18 when employees must schedule annual leave subject to 
forfeiture. 

2-9.  Compensatory Time Off for Travel 

Employees receive compensatory time off for time spent in travel status that is 
not otherwise compensable as hours of work. See FEMA Premium Pay 253-2-1, 
5 C.F.R. Part 550 Subpart N Compensatory Time Off for Travel for more 
information on earning requirements. 

A.  Compensatory time off for travel must be used in 15 minute increments. 

B.  Compensatory time off for travel must be used within 26 pay periods of the 

pay period in which it was earned.  

C.  If an employee separates from FEMA or the Federal service, any unused 

compensatory time off for travel is forfeited. 

2-10.  Absences for Disabled Veterans 

A.  A disabled veteran shall be granted annual leave, sick leave, or LWOP, as 
requested to seek medical treatment connected with a service injury (see 
Executive Order 5396). The veteran must present an official statement from a 
medical authority that such treatment is required. The veteran must give prior 
notice of definite days and hours of absence required for medical treatment in 
order that arrangements may be made for carrying on the work during his/her 
absence. 

B.  Effective November 5, 2016, an employee who is a veteran with a service-

connected disability rated at 30 percent or more will be entitled to receive up 
to 104 hours of leave for purposes of undergoing medical treatment for the 
disability during the first 12-month period of employment, beginning on the 
first day of employment with the Federal government. Any leave credited to 
an employee under this section that is not used during the 12-month period, 
may not be carried over and will be forfeited. The employee must submit an 
official statement from a health care provider that the leave will be used for 
treating the service-connected disability. 

17 

 
 
 
 
2-11.  Accommodation for Religious Exercise 

To the extent that modifications to an employee’s work schedule do not interfere 
with the efficient accomplishment of FEMA’s mission, Federal Law requires 
agencies to accommodate employees’ exercise of their religion unless such 
accommodation would impose undue hardship on the conduct of FEMA’s 
operation. The granting of accrued, accumulated, or advance annual leave (if 
other requirements on the advancement of leave are met) can be used to 
accommodate a requested absence for religious observance. Other options 
include alternative work schedules used within the requesting employee’s 
organization or compensatory time off for religious observances covered in 5 
C.F.R. 550.1002 and FM 253-2-1, Premium Pay, February 11, 2014. 

2-12.  Absence Without Leave 

When an employee fails to report for duty without prior approval or has an 
unauthorized absence from the workplace during the work day, he or she may be 
charged with Absence Without Leave (AWOL). 

An AWOL charge, the failure to follow appropriate leave procedures, or the 
failure to follow instructions that result in an AWOL charge may serve as the 
basis for corrective or disciplinary action when appropriate.  

Supervisors are required to properly and accurately document any periods of 
AWOL for employees under their supervision and to initiate disciplinary action, if 
warranted. Supervisors should maintain records and documentation of all periods 
of AWOL charged to their employees. At a minimum, the records should reflect 
the dates, times, and reasons for the AWOL charge and any verbal or written 
counseling which may have occurred. AWOL is charged in 15 minute increments. 

An employee charged with AWOL on the workdays before and after a holiday will 
not receive holiday pay for the holiday. An employee charged with AWOL on the 
workday before or after a holiday will receive holiday pay for the holiday, if 
excused from duty on the holiday and in a pay status on the workday before or 
after the holiday. 

If the employee provides administratively acceptable documentation to support 
an absence charged as AWOL, and the employee’s supervisor accepts the 
justification for the absence, the charge to AWOL may be changed to an 
approved leave category. If an AWOL charge is changed to an approved 
absence, a charge of AWOL cannot serve as the basis for corrective or 
disciplinary action. However, supervisors may still take corrective or disciplinary 
action for failing to follow appropriate leave procedures. 

18 

 
 
 
 
 
3-1.  Use of Annual Leave 

ANNUAL LEAVE 

A.  Employees may use annual leave for vacations, rest and relaxation, family 

needs, personal business, emergencies not covered by sick leave, and other 
activities. 

B.  Employees may request the use of annual leave for instances generally 
covered by sick leave. Employees can use annual leave for sick leave 
purposes when an employee has an insufficient amount of sick leave to cover 
an absence or when an employee is trying to build up his or her leave 
balance. Employees may be required to provide “administratively acceptable” 
medical documentation when substituting annual leave for sick leave. 

C.  Employees should not assume that having projected “use or lose” annual 
leave near the end of the leave year requires that management approve 
requests to use the projected “use or lose” annual leave. 

D.  Managers, supervisors, and leave approving officials maintain the discretion 
to approve when annual leave is taken based on the needs and workload of 
the organizational unit. Designated management officials will notify an 
employee in writing when a request for annual leave has been denied. 

3-2.  Earning Rates for Annual Leave 

A.  Employees accrue annual leave based on length of creditable Federal service 

or type of appointment. 

B.  Employees must be in a pay status for at least a portion of a pay period to 

earn annual leave for that pay period. If an employee is in a non-pay status 
(i.e., LWOP, including LWOP pending a disability claim), for an entire pay 
period, the employee will not accrue annual leave.  

C.  If an employee resigns or is separated from Federal service prior to the last 
workday of a pay period, the employee will not accrue annual leave for that 
pay period. 

D.  Full-time General Schedule (GS), CORE, and wage grade employees will 

accrue annual leave at the following rates: 

1.  Employees with less than 3 years of service earn 4 hours each full 

biweekly pay period. 

2.  Employees with 3 but less than 15 years of service earn 6 hours each full 

biweekly pay period, except for the last full pay period of the calendar year 
when they earn 10 hours. 

3.  Employees with 15 or more years of service earn 8 hours each full 

biweekly pay period. 

E.  Full-time employees who hold Senior Executive Service (SES), Senior-Level 
(SL), or Scientific or Professional (ST) positions will accrue eight (8) hours of 

19 

 
 
annual leave each full biweekly pay period. 

F.  Part-time GS, CORE, and wage grade employees will accrue annual leave at 

the following rates: 

1.  Employees with less than three years of service earn 1 hour for each 20 

hours in a pay status. 

2.  Employees with 3 years but less than 15 years of service earn 1 hour for 

each 13 hours in a pay status. 

3.  Employees with 15 or more years of service earn 1 hour for each 10 hours 

in a pay status. 

G.  Employees with uncommon tours of duty will accrue annual leave at the 

following rates: 

1.  Employees with less than three years of service earn 4 hours times the 
average number of hours worked in the bi-weekly pay period divided by 
80. 

2.  Employees with 3 years but less than 15 years of service earn 6 hours 
times the average number of hours worked in the bi-weekly pay period 
divided by 80. 

3.  Employees with 15 or more years of service earn 8 hours times the 

average number of hours worked in the bi-weekly pay period divided by 
80. 

3-3.  Advancing Annual Leave 

A.  The provisions for advancing annual leave apply only to employees whose 
continued employment is contemplated. Any request for advance annual 
leave must be made to the supervisor in writing, in advance of anticipated 
usage by the employee. 

B.  Employees may be advanced no more than the amount of annual leave to be 

earned in the remainder of the leave year. 

C.  The decision on whether to advance annual leave should be based on such 
considerations as the employee's reason for requesting it, workload status, 
and the interests of FEMA. 

D.  Upon return to active duty status from a period of extended annual leave, the 
employee must repay the advance annual leave during the period of his or 
her continued employment. The advance annual leave may be liquidated by 
subsequently earned annual leave. If an employee separates from the 
Federal service with a negative leave balance, the employee will be indebted 
to the Federal government for the remaining value of the advanced leave. 

20 

 
 
 
3-4.  Maximum Accumulation of Annual Leave 

A.  The maximum accumulation of annual leave which may be carried into a new 
leave year for most employees is 30 days (240 hours). However, there are 
some exceptions to the 30 day maximum accumulation for employees 
stationed outside the Unites States. These limited exceptions are covered in 5 
U.S.C. 6304 (b). 

B.  The maximum accumulation for employees in the Senior Executive Service 

(SES) is 90 days (720 hours). 

3-5.  Scheduling Annual Leave to Allow Potential Restoration 

Any annual in excess of the maximum leave ceiling will be forfeited at the end of 
the leave year. Leave scheduled and approved before the third biweekly pay 
period prior to the end of the leave year that cannot be taken, may be restored if 
the leave could not be taken due to exigencies of public business (determined by 
an appropriate authority), illness, or administrative error. Leave scheduled prior 
to this deadline may be restored only if the conditions in section 3-6 are met. 
Each year the OCCHCO issues a notice to inform employees of the pertinent 
deadlines, the final date to schedule leave, and the final date of the leave year. 
Employees are encouraged to request all leave as early as practicable. 

3-6.  Restoration of Annual Leave 

A.  If annual leave scheduled and approved prior to the third biweekly pay period 

prior to the end of the leave year is forfeited, it can be restored for the 
employee's later use only for the following reasons: 

1.  Exigencies of the public business which are approved by the head of an 

Office or Directorate at the time the exigency occurs; 

2.  Sickness; or 

3.  Administrative error which results in the loss of annual leave otherwise 

accruable. 

B.  In order for the head of an Office or Directorate to approve the cancellation of 
properly scheduled and approved annual leave because of "exigencies of the 
public business," the following conditions must exist: 

1.  There must have been no reasonable alternative to canceling leave for the 
particular employee in order to meet the work exigency (i.e., the work 
could not have been postponed, handled, or managed in another way, or 
performed by some other employee); and 

2.  There must have been specific beginning and ending dates of the critical 
work assignment, project, etc., that resulted in the cancellation of the 
scheduled leave. 

C.  Employees who forfeit annual leave as a result of any of the conditions above 

21 

 
 
 
may request restoration by sending a memorandum through their supervisor 
to the appropriate Office or Directorate head. Requests must be timely made 
following the end of the leave year, and must clearly state why the leave was 
forfeited. The employee must submit documentation showing the previously 
approved leave and a supervisor's memorandum explaining why it was 
necessary to cancel the leave. 

D.  When restoration is warranted, a memorandum stating it is warranted signed 

by the head of the Office or Directorate, or designee, will be sent to the 
employee with a copy forwarded to the OCCHCO for accounting purposes. 
Restored annual leave is maintained in a separate leave account. 

E.  Restored annual leave must be used not later than the end of the leave year 

ending two years after: 

1.  The date of restoration for leave forfeited because of administrative error; 

2.  A date fixed by FEMA management as the termination of the exigency; or 

3.  The date the employee is determined to be recovered and able to return to 

duty. 

4.  Restored annual leave that is not used within this time period cannot be 

restored again. 

3-7.  Annual Leave to Establish Retirement Eligibility 

An employee may use annual leave to qualify for retirement eligibility if the 
employee is subject to separation through a reduction-in-force, transfer of 
function, or when an employee declines to relocate to a different commuting 
area. An employee may use all accumulated, accrued, and restored annual leave 
to the employee’s credit prior to the effective date of the reduction-in-force, 
transfer of function, or relocation, as well as any annual leave earned after the 
effective date of the reduction-in-force, transfer of function, or relocation. An 
employee may not use advanced annual leave after the effective date of the 
reduction-in-force or transfer of function to establish retirement eligibility. 

3-8.  Terminal Leave 

Terminal leave is annual leave taken at the conclusion of a period of service and 
immediately before separation or retirement without the employee returning to 
duty. FEMA may not grant an employee terminal leave immediately prior to 
separation from the Federal service when it is known in advance that the 
employee will separate. If an employee does not return to duty from a period of 
annual leave, the employee’s last day on duty will be considered the effective 
date of separation (see Comp. Gen Opinion B-223876 dated June 12, 1987). 

An exception to this rule will be made for employees involuntarily separated 
because of a reduction-in-force or a transfer of function. In such cases, an 
employee may elect to use accrued annual leave to remain in service after the 

22 

 
 
 
date the employee would otherwise have been separated if, and only to the 
extent that, such additional service credit will enable the employee to qualify for 
an immediate retirement annuity or to qualify for health benefits coverage into 
retirement. 

3-9.  Lump Sum Payment of Annual Leave 

A.  When an employee separates from the Federal service, the employee will 
receive a lump-sum payment for accumulated and current accrued unused 
annual leave. The lump-sum payment will equal the pay the employee would 
have received if the employee remained in the Federal service and exhausted 
the amount of accumulated annual leave (holidays are counted as workdays 
in projecting the lump-sum leave period). The lump-sum payment period will 
not extend an employee’s service period. (See 5 U.S.C. § 5551 and 5 C.F.R. 
Part 550, subpart L). 

B.  The employee’s lump-sum payment is calculated by multiplying the number of 
hours of accumulated and accrued annual leave by the employee’s applicable 
hourly rate of pay. The following types of pay are included in the lump-sum 
payment calculations (See 5 C.F.R. § 550.1205): 

1.  Rate of basic pay; 

2.  Locality pay or other similar geographic adjustments; 

3.  Any statutory adjustments in pay or any general system-wide increases 
that become effective during the lump-sum period (FEMA will adjust the 
lump-sum payment to reflect the increased rate on and after the effective 
date of the pay adjustment); 

4.  A within-grade increase if the employee meets the requirements for an 

increase prior to the date the employee becomes eligible for a lump-sum 
payment; 

5.  Premium pay to the extent such premium pay was payable to the 

employee: 

i.  Night differential at the applicable rate for a prevailing rate employee 

for all regularly scheduled periods of night shift duty; 

ii.  Premium pay if the employee received premium pay for the pay period 
immediately prior to the date the employee became eligible for a lump-
sum payment, subject to any salary caps; 

iii.  Overtime pay for overtime work that is regularly scheduled during an 

employee’s established uncommon tour of duty (the uncommon tour of 
duty must be applicable for the pay period immediately prior to the date 
the employee became eligible for a lump-sum payment); 

6.  A supervisory differential (if applicable);  

7.  Non-foreign area cost-of-living allowance and/or post differentials; and 

23 

 
 
8.  A post allowance if the employee’s official duty station is in a foreign area. 

C.  If an employee is called to active military duty in the armed forces, the 

employee is entitled to (see 5 U.S.C. § 5552): 

1.  Receive a lump-sum payment for accumulated and current accrued 

annual leave in accordance with this section; or 

2.  Elect to have the annual leave remain to his or her credit until returning 

from active duty. 

24 

 
 
 
 
SICK LEAVE 

4-1.  Use of Sick Leave 

A.  FEMA must grant sick leave to an employee, subject to exceptions listed in 

section 4-5 Abuse of Sick Leave Privileges, when an employee: 

1.  Receives medical, dental, or optical examination or treatment; 

2.  Is incapacitated from the performance of position duties by physical or 

mental illness, injury, pregnancy, or childbirth; 

3.  Provides care for a family member who is incapacitated by a medical or 

mental condition, or attends to a family member receiving medical, dental, 
or optical examination or treatment; 

4.  Provides care for a family member with a serious health condition; 

5.  Makes arrangements funeral arrangements or attends the funeral of a 

family member; 

6.  Would, because of communicable disease, jeopardize the health of other 
employees and/or the general public by being on the job (when there is 
uncertainty as to whether a particular ailment meets the definition of a 
"communicable disease" and it is not addressed by local health 
regulations, the employee should be asked to provide a statement from 
the patient's physician that the ailment is contagious. This statement 
should contain the period of time for which the patient must be confined or 
isolated); or 

7.  Must be absent from work for adoption-related activities (e.g., 

appointments with adoption agencies, social workers and attorneys, court 
proceedings, required travel, periods of time adoptive parents are required 
by court or agency to care for the adopted child.). 

B.  Full-time employees may use a total of 12 weeks (480 hours) of sick leave 
per year to care for a family member with a serious health condition. For a 
part-time employee or an employee with an uncommon tour of duty, an 
employee may use 12 times the average number of hours in his or her 
scheduled tour of duty each week to care for a member with a serious health 
condition. 

C.  Part-time employees are covered by the regulation, but their sick-leave 

benefits are pro-rated. For instance, a part-time employee who works 20 
hours a week, could use 20 hours of sick leave or from 21 to 240 hours if they 
maintained a sick leave balance of at least 40 hours. 

4-2.  Earning Rates for Sick Leave 

Earning of sick leave is not affected by length of service. Full-time employees 
earn sick leave at a rate of 4 hours for each full biweekly pay period. Part-time 
employees with an established tour of duty earn sick leave at a rate of 1 hour for 

25 

 
 
each 20 hours of duty they are in pay status (with a maximum of 4 hours of sick 
leave per pay period). Employees are not limited in the amount of sick leave they 
may accumulate and carryover from one year to the next. 

4-3.  Requesting Sick Leave 

Employees should request sick leave to attend medical appointments as soon as 
possible after the appointment is scheduled or when they are reasonably certain 
of the time an appointment will be made. Except for emergencies, employees 
must request advance approval of sick leave for medical, dental, or optical 
examinations or treatment. Employees who are unable to report for duty because 
of personal illness or injury will notify the supervisors as soon as possible. 
Normally, an employee shall notify their supervisor according to the procedures 
established by his or her supervisor or applicable bargaining agreement at the 
onset of an illness or injury. The employee will provide the supervisor with an 
estimate of the time that he or she expects to be absent because of the illness. If 
the employee expects to deviate from the previously approved estimate of time 
for sick leave, the employee will contact the supervisor. Failure to properly notify 
the supervisor of the use of sick leave or an incapacitation can lead to the 
placement of an employee in an AWOL status or other disciplinary measures. 

4-4.  Medical Certificates 

Employees are required to provide “administratively acceptable” evidence to their 
supervisor when requesting sick leave. Normally, the only thing needed to satisfy 
this requirement is an employee’s certification as to the reason for the absence.  
However, for an absence in excess of three workdays (or for shorter absences 
where there are reasonable suspicions about the circumstances of the leave or 
where it is unclear whether the employee is totally incapacitated for duty), 
supervisors may require an employee who misses work to submit a doctor’s 
certification of the medical reason for the leave or other satisfactory evidence as 
to the reason for the absence. If a supervisor has a reasonable basis to suspect 
an employee is abusing sick leave, the employee may be required to support all 
incidences of sick leave with a medical certificate regardless of duration. The 
employee must provide the required certification within a reasonable amount of 
time. Unapproved sick leave may be charged to annual leave or as AWOL. 

4-5.  Abuse of Sick Leave Privileges 

Sick leave abuse can create morale problems with other employees who are 
forced to cover for absent employees and also costs FEMA in terms of both 
excessive and unwarranted leave payments and lost productivity.  

Each supervisor should periodically review the sick leave records of employees 
who show a pattern of repeated sick leave. An employee whose record is 
questionable may be required to submit a medical certificate in support of any 

26 

 
 
 
 
future absence, regardless of length, for which a request for sick leave is made. 
An employee who misuses sick leave may receive a charge to AWOL which may 
result in disciplinary action. 

4-6.  Advancing Sick Leave 

A.  An employee may, at the supervisor’s discretion, be granted sick leave in 

advance of accrual in the event of serious disability or ailment, defined as one 
which usually lasts for at least 3 consecutive work days and is supported by a 
medical certificate. 

B.  A supervisor should not advance sick leave to an employee when it is known 
(or reasonably expected) that the employee will not return to duty (e.g., when 
the employee has applied for disability retirement). 

C.  Supervisors should consider the need for the employee’s service, the 

expectation of a return to duty, the employee’s history of leave usage, and the 
availability of other leave, such as annual leave or LWOP, in their 
determinations.  

D.  The maximum amount of sick leave that may be granted to a requesting full 

time employee is 240 hours, and will be restricted to: 

1.  An employee who is incapacitated for the performance of duties by 

physical or mental illness, injury, pregnancy, or childbirth; 

2.  For a serious health condition of the employee or a family member; 

3.  When an employee would jeopardize the health of others with his or her 
presence on the job because of exposure to a communicable disease; 

4.  For purposes relating to the adoption of a child; or 

5.  For the care of a covered service member with a serious injury or illness if 
the employee is exercising an entitlement right under 5 U.S.C. 6382(a)(3). 

E.  FEMA may, at the supervisor’s discretion, advance up to 104 hours to a full-

time employee: 

1.  For medical, dental, or optical examination or treatment; 

2.  To provide care for a family member who is incapacitated by a medical or 
mental condition, or to attend to a family member receiving medical, 
dental, or optical examination or treatment; 

3.  To provide care for a family member who would jeopardize the health of 
others by that family member’s presence because of exposure to a 
communicable disease; or 

4.  To make arrangements necessitated by the death of a family member or 

to attend the funeral of a family member. 

F.  The maximum amount of sick leave FEMA may advance to part-time 

employees is prorated by the number of hours in the employee’s regularly 

27 

 
 
scheduled administrative workweek. 

G.  The maximum amount of advanced sick leave that an employee may have on 
balance at any time, no matter the reason for the leave, is 240 hours. For 
example, if an employee is given 104 hours of advanced sick leave in order to 
make funeral arrangements for a family member in July, and requests 240 
hours of advanced sick leave for a serious health condition that requires 
treatment in August, the employee will only be able to receive 136 hours of 
advanced leave to treat their serious health condition. 

H.  Sick leave may be advanced only if an employee has exhausted his or her 

annual leave or compensatory time off balance. 

I.  Employees may not be advanced sick leave during a period of active military 

duty. 

J.  Employees cannot be advanced sick leave for care of a covered service 

member, unless the employee invokes FMLA to care for the covered service 
member. 

K.  Advance sick leave should not be granted to a probationary employee beyond 
what the employee would be expected to earn during the probationary period 
until the supervisor has had an opportunity to reach a decision about the 
employee's continued employment. 

L.  When an employee who is indebted for advanced sick leave separates from 
Federal Service, he or she is required to refund the amount of advanced sick 
leave or the agency may deduct that amount from any pay due to the 
employee upon separation, and then proceed to reclaim the remaining 
balance. 

M.  When an employee who has been advanced sick leave leaves FEMA without 

having made up the balance of advance leave, the supervisor must 
immediately call the OCCHCO to report that the employee will be resigning 
from the Federal Government. The supervisor is then required to send a 
follow-up letter to the payroll office.  

N.  Once an advance has been granted, further use of sick leave constitutes an 
additional advance and must meet all the criteria of this section before it can 
be approved. If an employee cannot be granted additional advanced sick 
leave or the employee is not approved for an additional advance of sick leave, 
absences due to illnesses must be charged to annual leave or LWOP. 

O.  Upon return to active duty status from a period of extended sick leave, the 

employee must repay the advance sick leave during the period of his or her 
continued employment. The advance of sick leave may be liquidated by 
subsequently earned sick leave. The employee may also choose to liquidate 
the indebtedness by a charge against annual leave (provided this action is not 
for the purpose of avoiding a forfeiture of annual leave at the end of the leave 
year), or by a charge against annual leave received by the employee as an 
approved leave recipient. The employee may arrange to pay for advanced 
annual or sick leave in cash at any time if such an arrangement is approved 

28 

 
by OCCHCO. 

P.  Indebtedness related to advance sick leave is waived for employees 
approved for disability retirement and for deceased employees. 

4-7.  Substitution of Sick Leave for Annual Leave 

When sickness occurs within a period of annual leave, an employee may be 
granted sick leave for the period of illness, provided the employee notifies his/her 
supervisor within a reasonable period of time, within one pay period, to request 
sick leave via WebTA. In circumstances in which it is unclear whether the 
employee is incapacitated, FEMA may request more information or medical 
documentation, as appropriate prior to approving the substitution. 

4-8.  Sick Leave Used in the Computation of an Annuity 

If an employee retires from the Federal service on an immediate annuity or dies 
leaving a survivor entitled to an annuity, any unused sick leave will be used in the 
calculation of the employee’s or survivor’s annuity. Sick leave used to calculate 
an annuity will be charged against the employee’s sick leave account and may 
not thereafter be used, transferred, or recredited. All sick leave in the employee’s 
sick leave account on the date of his or her retirement or death, will be credited 
towards the annuity calculation and will be considered used. 

4-9.  Records on the Use of Sick Leave 

FEMA must maintain records of the amount of sick leave used by an employee 
for family care purposes and to make arrangements for or attend the funeral of a 
family member under section 630.401(a)(3) and (4). The records must be 
sufficient to ensure an employee does not exceed the limitations in section 
630.401(b) and (c). 

29 

 
 
 
 
 
 
5-1.  Leave Entitlement 

FAMILY MEDICAL LEAVE ACT 

The Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA) entitles eligible employees to take up to 
12 administrative workweeks of unpaid leave in certain situations. Employees 
who take unpaid leave through FMLA will be returned to their same or equivalent 
position at the end of the period of leave, with the same benefits, pay, status, and 
other conditions of employment. Employees interested in taking leave under 
FMLA should discuss their leave plans with their supervisor as early as possible 
to ensure the employee’s leave request is allowable under FMLA and an orderly 
transfer of duties and responsibilities during the employee’s absence. 

A.  An employee is entitled to a total of 12 administrative workweeks of unpaid 

leave during any 12 month period for one of the following purposes: 

1.  The birth of a son or daughter of the employee and the care of such son or 

daughter; 

2.  The placement of a son or daughter with the employee for adoption or 

foster care; 

3.  The care of a spouse, son, daughter, or parent of the employee with a 

serious health condition; 

4.  In response to a serious health condition of the employee who is unable to 
perform any one or more of the essential functions of his or her position; 
or 

5.  Any qualifying exigency arising out of the fact that the employee’s spouse, 
son, daughter, or parent is a covered military member on covered active 
duty (or has received notice to be called to active duty) in the Armed 
Forces (see 5 C.F.R. § 630.1204 for more information). 

B.  An employee (or an employee’s representative) must invoke his or her right to 
take leave under FMLA before taking leave. An employee cannot retroactively 
invoke his or her right to take leave under FMLA, unless the employee is 
mentally or physically incapable of providing notice of his or her intent to take 
FMLA leave during the entire time the employee is absent from duty. In such 
cases, the employee may be required to provide documentation explaining 
the employee’s and/or representative’s inability to notify FEMA of the 
employee’s absence. A supervisor may ask an employee if it is his or her 
intent to invoke his or her FMLA protection when he or she is requesting 
qualifying leave. 

C.  The 12 month period begins on the date an employee first takes leave under 
FMLA. An employee is not entitled to an additional 12 weeks of FMLA leave 
until the previous 12 month period ends and the employee experiences an 
event that will entitle the employee to leave under FMLA. 

D.  The 12 administrative workweeks of leave are based on the employee’s 

regularly scheduled workweek. The 12 administrative workweeks of leave 

30 

 
equals 12 times the average number of hours in the employee’s regularly 
scheduled administrative workweek.  

5-2.  Applicability and Eligibility 

A.  Permanent employees and employees serving under a temporary 

appointment of more than one year are covered by the regulations under 5 
C.F.R. Part 630, Subpart L. 

1.  Employees must have at least 12 months of Federal service with a regular 

tour of duty to receive the protections and benefits under FMLA. 

2.  The service does not need to be continuous. 

3.  Service under temporary appointments of one year or less or on an 
intermittent duty basis does not count towards meeting the eligibility 
requirement. 

B.  Employees who do not have a scheduled tour of duty (i.e., employees with an 

intermittent duty schedule) and employees serving under a temporary 
appointment of one year or less are covered by the regulations under 29 
C.F.R. Part 825 (see FD 010-6, FEMA Reservist Program, June 14, 2012). 

1.  Employees must have at least 12 months of Federal service. 

2.  The service does not need to be continuous. 

3.  The employee must have worked for at least 1,250 hours during the 
previous 12 months prior to the period for which FMLA is to be used. 

5-3.  Serious Health Condition 

A.  FMLA allows employees to take up to 12 administrative workweeks of unpaid 
leave for serious health conditions. A serious health condition under FMLA 
means an illness, injury, impairment, or other physical or mental condition that 
involves inpatient care (i.e., an overnight stay in a hospital), or continuing 
treatment by a health care provider. Continuing treatment by a health care 
provider may include one or more of the following: 

1.  A period of incapacity of more than 3 consecutive calendar days (including 
any subsequent treatment or period of incapacity relating to the same 
condition) that also involves: 

i.  Treatment two or more times by a health care provider, or by a 

provider of health care services under orders of, or on referral by a 
health care provider; or 

ii.  Treatment by a health care provider on at least one occasion which 
results in a regimen of continuing treatment under the supervision of 
the health care provider (e.g., a course of prescription medication or 
therapy requiring special equipment to resolve or alleviate the health 
condition); 

31 

 
 
 
2.  Any period of incapacity due to pregnancy or pre-natal care, even if the 
affected individual does not receive active treatment from a health care 
provider during the period of incapacity or the period of incapacity does 
not last more than three consecutive calendar days; 

3.  A chronic serious condition requiring treatment by a health care provider 

that continues over an extended period of time which may cause episodic 
rather than a continuing period of incapacity (e.g., asthma, diabetes, 
epilepsy); 

4.  Permanent or long-term conditions requiring supervision by a health care 

provider; 

5.  Multiple treatments for non-chronic conditions. 

B.  Employees may not use FMLA for routine or minor medical appointments or 
illnesses. Employees may use sick leave in response to short-term, routine, 
or other minor health conditions (see chapter 4). Employees may not use 
FMLA for the following purposes: 

1.  Routine physical, eye, or dental examinations; 

2.  A regimen of continuing treatment involving over-the-counter medications, 
bed-rest, exercise, or other similar activities that can be initiated without a 
visit to a health care provider; 

3.  Voluntary cosmetic surgery, unless inpatient care is required or 

complications develop; 

4.  Absences due to an employee’s use of an illegal substance, unless the 
employee is receiving treatment for substance abuse by or on referral 
from a health care provider; 

5.  The common cold, the flu, earaches, upset stomach, minor ulcers, 

headaches, routine dental or orthodontia problems, and periodontal 
disease, unless complications arise; or 

6.  Allergies, restorative dental or plastic surgery after an injury, removal of 
cancerous growth, or mental illness resulting from stress may be serious 
health conditions only if such conditions require inpatient care or 
continuing treatment by a health care provider. 

5-4.  Notice to Take Leave 

If the need to take leave under FMLA is foreseeable (i.e., expected childbirth, 
adoption, foster care, or planned medical procedure), the employee (or the 
employee’s representative) shall notify his or her supervisor at least 30 calendar 
days before the start of the planned leave. If the need for the leave is 
unforeseeable, and the employee cannot provide a full 30 calendar days’ notice, 
the employee shall notify his or her supervisor as soon as practical. If the need 
for the leave is foreseeable, and the employee fails to provide sufficient notice 
with no reasonable excuse, the employee’s supervisor may require the employee 

32 

 
 
to delay taking leave under FMLA until the employee provides at least 30 
calendar days’ notice.  

5-5. 

Intermittent or Reduced Leave Schedule 

An employee may take intermittent FMLA leave or reduced leave for the birth of 
a son or daughter, the care of a newborn son or daughter, or the placement of a 
son or daughter with the employee for adoption or foster care with the approval 
of the employee’s supervisor. An employee may take intermittent FMLA leave or 
reduced leave for the care of a spouse, son, daughter, or parent  with a serious 
health condition, or in response to the employee’s own serious health condition 
when medically necessary. If an employee invokes FMLA on an intermittent or 
reduced leave schedule for a serious health condition, FEMA may place the 
employee in an alternate position that can accommodate the employee’s leave 
schedule (see 5 C.F.R. § 620.1205). 

5-6.  Substitution of Paid Leave 

Once an employee invokes his or her right to leave under FMLA, an employee 
may substitute future scheduled periods of unpaid leave with paid leave (i.e., an 
employee may not retroactively substitute paid leave for unpaid leave). An 
employee may substitute annual leave, sick leave, advanced annual leave, 
advanced sick leave, or any donated leave under the Voluntary Leave Transfer 
Program. An employee may not be forced to substitute paid leave for LWOP. An 
employee may not substitute compensatory time or credit hours for unpaid leave. 
If an employee substitutes paid sick leave for unpaid leave, the normal rules for 
using sick leave apply (i.e., an employee cannot use sick leave to bond with a 
newborn child).  

5-7.  Medical Certification and Supporting Documentation 

If an employee invokes his or her right to unpaid leave under FMLA, the 
employee will be required to submit sufficient documentation to support the 
leave. If an employee takes leave in response to a serious health condition, the 
employee will be required to submit written medical certification from the 
appropriate health care provider. The medical certification must include: 

A.  The start date of the medical condition; 

B.  The probable duration of the medical condition; 

C.  The appropriate medical facts, including a general statement as to the 

incapacitation, examination, or treatment that may be required by a health 
care provider; 

D.  If the leave is to care for a spouse, son, daughter, or parent with a serious 

health condition, a statement that the family member requires psychological 

33 

 
 
 
 
and/or physical care, and needs assistance for basic medical, hygienic, 
nutritional, safety, or transportation needs in response to such a condition; 

E.  If the leave is in response to the employee’s serious health condition, a 

statement that the employee is unable to perform one or more of the essential 
functions of the employee’s position or requires medical treatment for a 
serious condition; and 

F.  In the event of intermittent leave or a reduced leave schedule for planned 
medical treatments, the dates of the treatments (actual or estimates), the 
duration of the treatments, and the period of recovery if applicable; or a 
statement that the serious health condition is a chronic or continuing condition 
with an unknown duration, whether the patient is currently incapacitated, and 
the estimated duration and frequency of the episodes of incapacity. 

5-8.  Continued Employment and Health Benefits 

A.  An employee who takes leave under FMLA is entitled, upon return to duty, to 

be returned to the same position the employee held before taking FMLA leave 
or an equivalent position with the same benefits, pay, status, and other terms 
and conditions of employment. FEMA may not return an employee to an 
equivalent position that is subject to a written notification of a reduction-in-
force, if the employee’s previous position is not affected by a reduction-in-
force. 

B.  An employee enrolled in a health plan through the Federal Employees Health 
Benefits Program (FEHB) who invokes his or her right to take unpaid leave 
under FMLA, may continue his or her health benefits if the employee pays his 
or her appropriate employee share of the insurance premiums. 

C.  The supervisor of record may require an employee to report periodically on 

his or her status and intention to return to work. 

5-9.  Return to Work 

If an employee takes leave under FMLA to respond to a serious health condition, 
the employee may be required to provide a written medical certification from the 
employee’s health care provider that the employee is able to perform the 
essential functions of his or her position before the employee will be allowed to 
return to work. The employee’s supervisor must gain OCCHCO’s approval to 
request such certification before giving notice to the employee of the 
requirement. The employee’s supervisor will inform the employee of the need to 
provide such documentation before the employee takes leave. If the need for the 
leave is unforeseeable, the employee will be given notice of the certification 
requirement as soon as practicable under the circumstances. If an employee is 
required to provide written certification before returning to work, FEMA must 
apply the requirement to all similarly situated employees (i.e., employees in the 
same occupation or with the same serious health condition). 

34 

 
 
 
5-10.  Records and Reporting 

OCCHCO will maintain and provide records on the use of FMLA as appropriate. 
At a minimum, the records will state the employee’s basic rate of pay, 
occupational series, the number of hours taken, and the reason for the FMLA 
leave. 

35 

 
 
 
ABSENCE FOR MATERNITY AND PATERNITY 

6-1.  Eligibility and Use of Leave for Maternity and Paternity Reasons 

A.  Absence due to pregnancy is treated like any other period of medical 

incapacitation. 

B.  Employees are eligible to use a combination of annual leave, sick leave, 
compensatory time off or credit time if available, LWOP, FMLA, and/or 
donated leave for maternity or paternity related absences. Parents may use 
annual leave, compensatory time off if available, FMLA, and LWOP to 
prepare for the birth of a child (e.g., to attend birthing classes), to bond with or 
care for a healthy newborn child, or to care for other children in the 
household. 

C.  Parents may not use sick leave or donated leave to be absent from work to 

bond with or care for a healthy newborn child. 

D.  The Federal Government, including FEMA, does not offer a separate leave 
benefit for maternity or paternity purposes (i.e., maternity leave or paternity 
leave). 

E.  State regulations and policies covering maternity or paternity leave do not 
supersede the policies, rules, and regulations of the Federal Government. 

6-2.  Leave Requests 

A.  Employees requesting leave for maternity or paternity reasons shall submit a 
written request to their supervisor. For planning purposes, the written request 
should specify the precise nature of leave being requested; i.e., sick leave, 
annual leave, FMLA, and/or LWOP. 

B.  Employees should submit a physician's or practitioner's written certification 
stating that the employee or mother is pregnant, the expected delivery date, 
the approximate time period for which the employee or mother will be 
incapacitated because of pregnancy, and the date on which the employee 
can be expected, under normal conditions, to return to work. 

C.  When submitting the request, the employee should indicate whether or not 

the employee intends to return to duty after delivery. If the employee does not 
intend to return to duty after the delivery, the employee’s resignation should 
be obtained in advance to be effective at the expiration of the period of paid 
leave. 

D.  The employee should report pregnancy in a reasonable time after it is known 
so that steps can be taken to protect the mother’s health, adjust her working 
conditions if necessary, and to plan for any staffing adjustments. When there 
is doubt concerning the employee's ability to continue to perform the duties of 
the position safely, the supervisor should have her furnish a medical 
certificate authorizing continued work and should take whatever precautionary 

36 

 
 
measures appear necessary. OCCHCO can provide guidance on available 
leave options. 

6-3.  Leave for Maternity Reasons 

A.  A birth mother is entitled to use sick leave for medical appointments, 

hospitalization, and for her period of incapacitation following childbirth. 

B.  A mother may use accrued annual leave for pregnancy, childbirth, and to 

bond with or care for a healthy newborn child. 

C.  A mother is entitled to use up to 12 weeks (480 hours) unpaid leave under 

FMLA for absences related to pregnancy and childbirth, to provide care to a 
newborn child with a serious health condition, or to bond with a newborn 
child. 

D.  An employee may not use sick leave or donated leave to extend an absence 

related to pregnancy or childbirth beyond the period of physical 
incapacitation.  

6-4.  Leave for Paternity Reasons 

A.  A birth father may use up to 12 weeks (480 hours) of accrued sick leave each 
year to accompany the mother to prenatal appointments, during periods when 
the mother or newborn child is hospitalized, and/or during the mother’s 
recovery periods (see section 4-1). 

B.  A father may use accrued annual leave to care for the mother of a newborn 
child during pregnancy and childbirth, or to bond with or care for a healthy 
newborn child. 

C.  A father is entitled to use up to 12 weeks (480 hours) of unpaid leave under 

FMLA to care for the mother of a newborn child during her period of 
incapacitation, to provide care if the mother or child has a serious health 
condition, or to bond with a newborn child. 

D.  With supervisory approval, a father may use LWOP for absences related to 

pregnancy and childbirth, or to bond with or care for a healthy newborn child. 

6-5.  Advance of Annual and/or Sick Leave 

A.  FEMA may advance the amount of annual leave a mother or father would 
accrue during the remainder of the leave year for purposes related to 
childbirth. 

B.  FEMA must advance a maximum of 30 days (240 hours) of sick leave to a 

mother or father during the mother’s period of incapacitation from pregnancy, 
childbirth, or to care for a child with a serious health condition. 

37 

 
 
 
 
C.  An employee is required to repay advanced annual or sick leave, except in 

very limited circumstances (e.g., disability retirement or death). An employee 
who requests advanced annual or sick leave will be indebted to FEMA until 
the debt is repaid (usually through earning annual or sick leave). FEMA will 
not advance annual or sick leave to an employee who will not or is not 
expected to return to duty after taking leave. 

D.  See sections 3-3 and 4-6 for specific rules on advancing annual or sick leave. 

6-6.  FMLA for Maternity and Paternity Purposes 

A.  An employee may begin to use FMLA protected leave before the actual date 
of the birth which will also begin the 12 month period to use leave under 
FMLA. If an employee does invoke the right to leave under FMLA prior to the 
date of birth, the employee’s 12 month period to use leave under FMLA 
begins on the date the employee first takes leave under FMLA and may end 
before the child’s first birthday. 

B.  If an employee wishes to use FMLA to bond with a newborn child, the 

employee must invoke the use of FMLA before the child’s first birthday. 

C.  With supervisor approval, an employee may use leave under FMLA on an 

intermittent basis for care or bonding with a newborn child. 

D.  Employees must adhere to all procedures for the use of leave under FMLA. 

For additional information on the use of FMLA, see Chapter 5. 

6-7.  VLTP for Maternity and Paternity Purposes 

A.  Pregnancy is treated as a short-term illness for the purpose of the Voluntary 

Leave Transfer Program (VLTP). 

B.  Employees may not use donated leave to care for or bond with a healthy 

newborn child, or to care for healthy children in the home. 

C.  Employees may apply to become a leave recipient under the VLTP for 

maternity or paternity related absences including periods when a mother is 
under doctor ordered bed rest, periods when the mother is incapacitated 
following childbirth, absences related to medical complications arising from 
pregnancy or childbirth, or absences to care for a newborn child with a 
serious health condition. 

D.  Donated leave may be substituted retroactively for any period of leave without 

pay used because of a medical emergency or used to liquidate a debt 
incurred by an employee for receiving advanced annual or sick leave. 

6-8.  Adoption and Foster Care 

Employees may use the following leave flexibilities to adopt or foster a child: 

38 

 
 
 
 
A.  Sick leave 

1.  An employee may use sick leave for: 

i.  Appointments with adoption agencies, social workers, or attorneys; 

ii.  Court proceedings; 

iii.  Required travel; 

iv.  Any periods when the employee is required by the adoption agency or 

a court to take time off from work to care for an adopted child; or 

v.  Any other activities necessary to complete an adoption; 

2.  An employee may not use sick leave to bond with or care for a healthy 

child. 

3.  An employee, who is fostering a child, can only use sick leave for 
adoption-related purposes if the employee is adopting the child. 

4.  An employee who is accompanying a family member to activities related 

to an adoption is not entitled to use sick leave for adoption. 

5.  FEMA may request administratively acceptable evidence for the use of 

sick leave for adoption-related purposes. 

6.  Upon request, employees must be granted up to 240 hours of advanced 
sick leave for purposes related to adopting or fostering a child with a 
serious health condition, or up to 104 hours of advanced sick leave to care 
for a child with a routine illness, or for medical, dental, or optical 
appointments. 

B.  Annual and Paid leave 

1.  Annual leave may be used for any purpose relating to adopting or 

fostering a child. 

2.  FEMA may advance an employee the amount of annual leave an 
employee would accrue during the remainder of the leave year. 

C.  An employee’s entitlement to FMLA leave for adoption or foster care expires 

12 months after the placement of the child with the employee. 

D.  Voluntary Leave Transfer Program (VLTP) 

1.  Employees may apply to receive donated leave only in response to 
medical emergencies (e.g., care of an adopted or foster child with a 
serious health condition). 

2.  Donated leave may be substituted retroactively for any period of leave 

without pay used because of a medical emergency. 

39 

 
 
 
7-1.  Eligibility and Use of Court Leave 

COURT LEAVE 

A.  Court leave is not charged to leave and will not result in a loss of pay to 

employees who serve as a juror. 

B.  If the employee is a party to a suit with only private parties, the employee 

cannot use court leave, but must use annual leave, credit or compensatory 
leave, or LWOP. 

C.  Court leave must be requested in advance, and a copy of the summons or 
subpoena must be included in the request. Employees may be required to 
provide proof of attendance as a juror or witness. 

D.  There is no limit on the amount of court leave that may be granted to an 

employee. 

E.  Unless the time or distance involved make it impractical, employees are 

expected to leave their duty station no earlier than necessary to arrive on time 
for court service, and to return to work at the end of each day’s court service if 
the employee can return to work at least one hour before the end of the 
employee’s normal tour of duty.  

F.  An employee released from jury or witness duty who is required to return to 
duty during the workday may request annual leave, credit or compensatory 
time off if available, or LWOP in lieu of returning to duty for the remainder of 
the workday. 

G.  An employee will be charged with AWOL if: 

1.  The employee is dismissed from jury or witness duty and is directed to 

return to duty but does not; or 

2.  The employee’s service as a juror or witness is cancelled for the day but 

the employee does not report to work as scheduled.  

H.  For court leave purposes, applicable judicial proceedings includes any trial, 

action, suit, or other matter before a court, but does not include an 
administrative proceeding such as an arbitration hearing or a hearing or 
appeal before the Merit Systems Protection Board, the Federal Labor 
Relations Authority, or the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. 

7-2.  Jury Duty 

FEMA’s policy is to not seek to have employees excused from jury duty, except 
for key officials whose services cannot be spared for an extended period of time. 

A.  If an employee is on a period of scheduled annual leave when called to serve 

as a juror, court leave must be substituted and used if the employee is 
otherwise eligible. Jury duty is considered an “exigency of public business,” 
and annual leave which has been forfeited because of a period of court leave 
may be restored if it otherwise meets the criteria for restoration (e.g., had 

40 

 
 
been scheduled and approved in writing at least three pay periods before the 
end of the leave year). 

B.  When a holiday occurs during the period an employee is called to jury duty or 
and the employee is normally required to work on the holiday, the employee 
receives holiday (leave) pay. The employee does not receive holiday 
premium pay. 

C.  Employees in a non-pay status (LWOP, AWOL, suspension, or furlough) 

when called for jury duty are not entitled to court leave. An employee must be 
scheduled for paid leave or normal duty in order to qualify for court leave. 

7-3.  Serving as a Witness 

A.  When an employee is called to appear as a witness, the employee’s leave 
status depends on whether the employee is testifying in an official or non-
official status, which party is requesting the employee’s testimony, and 
whether the United States, a State, or local government is a party to the 
action. 

B.  An employee called to testify in an official capacity (i.e., the testimony is 

related to current or former official duties), or assigned by FEMA to produce 
official records is in official duty status and does not use court leave, 
regardless of who the parties are to a case. 

1.  An employee required to testify in an official capacity on a regular day off 

must be compensated accordingly. 

2.  While testifying in an official duty status, an employee is eligible for 
government travel expenses, including per diem, as appropriate. 

C.  An employee called as a witness in a non-official capacity on behalf of a state 
or local government, or on behalf of any party in connection with any judicial 
proceeding in which the United States, the District of Columbia, a state, or 
local government is a party must be given court leave. 

D.  If an employee is called to give a deposition in a case which a party in the 
proceeding is the United States, the District of Columbia, a state, or local 
government, the employee is entitled to court leave for the time involved in 
giving the deposition.  

E.  An employee appearing in court for a traffic violation is not entitled to court 
leave in connection with his or her appearance in court as a defendant. 

F.  An employee testifying on his or her behalf cannot use court leave and must 
use annual leave, LWOP, or credit or compensatory time off if available. 

G.  If an employee is a party in a suit against the United States, the District of 
Columbia, a state, or local government, the time the employee spends in 
preparation for and during trial cannot be charged to court leave, but must be 
charged to annual leave, LWOP, or credit or compensatory time off if 
available. 

41 

 
 
1.  Except if an employee is a plaintiff against a Federal agency in a civil 

action related to, or caused by, a violation of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 
and the employee-plaintiff prevails in the civil action. Under such 
circumstances the employee should not be charged with leave and is 
entitled to official time for court appearances.  

2.  If the employee-plaintiff does not prevail in such a civil rights action, any 
related absences must be charged to annual leave, LWOP, or credit or 
compensatory time off if available. 

3.  Until the conclusion of the civil rights action, the leave status for an 

employee-plaintiff must tentatively be recorded as annual leave, accrued 
credit or compensatory leave, or LWOP. 

H.  An employee called as a witness in a nonofficial capacity in a judicial 

proceeding involving only private parties is not entitled to court leave and 
must use annual leave, credit or compensatory leave, or LWOP for such 
appearances. 

I.  An employee who is not summoned as a witness, but who appears before a 

court voluntarily and requests to testify is not entitled to court leave. 

J.  If an employee is on a period of scheduled annual leave when called to serve 
as a witness, court leave must be substituted and used if the employee is 
otherwise eligible. Serving as a witness service is considered an “exigency of 
public business,” and annual leave which has been forfeited because of a 
period of court leave may be restored if it otherwise meets the criteria for 
restoration (e.g., had been scheduled and approved in writing at least three 
pay periods before the end of the leave year). 

K.  Employees do not receive court leave to serve as a witness on a regular day 

off (i.e., if the employee is on a compressed work schedule).  

L.  When a holiday occurs during the period an employee is called to serve as a 
witness and the employee is normally required to work on the holiday, the 
employee receives holiday (leave) pay. The employee does not receive 
holiday premium pay. 

M.  Employees in a non-pay status (LWOP, AWOL, suspension, or furlough) 

when called to serve as a witness are not entitled to court leave. An employee 
must be scheduled for paid leave or normal duty in order to qualify for court 
leave. 

7-4.  Court or Witness Fees 

A.  If a jurisdiction provides compensation or fees to jurors or witnesses to help 
make up for lost wages as a result of serving as a juror or witness and the 
employee uses court leave or is in an official duty status, the employee must 
collect any such compensation for their service and turn it in to FEMA. An 
employee who neglects to collect the fees for jury service will be indebted to 
FEMA. 

42 

 
 
B.  If a jurisdiction reimburses jurors or witnesses for costs associated with 
serving as a juror or witness (i.e., meals, parking, or transportation), the 
employee is entitled to retain any such reimbursements. 

C.  An employee appearing as a witness in a nonofficial capacity in a judicial 
proceeding involving only private parties is entitled to retain any fees or 
expenses associated with such appearances. 

D.  If an employee is in a non-pay status (i.e., LWOP, AWOL, suspension, or 

furlough) while serving as a juror or witness, the employee is entitled to retain 
all forms of compensation associated with service as a juror or witness. 

7-5.  Court Leave and Other Leave Categories 

A.  If an employee is on a period of scheduled annual leave when called to serve 

as a juror or witness, court leave must be substituted and used if the 
employee is otherwise eligible. Jury duty or witness service is considered an 
“exigency of public business,” and annual leave which has been forfeited 
because of a period of court leave may be restored if it otherwise meets the 
criteria for restoration (e.g., had been scheduled and approved in writing at 
least three pay periods before the end of the leave year). 

B.  Employees do not receive court leave to serve as a juror or witness on a 
regular day off (i.e., if the employee is on a compressed work schedule).  

C.  When a holiday occurs during the period an employee is called to jury duty or 
to serve as a witness and the employee is normally required to work on the 
holiday, the employee receives holiday (leave) pay. The employee does not 
receive holiday premium pay. 

D.  Employees in a non-pay status (LWOP, AWOL, suspension, or furlough) 
when called for jury duty or to serve as a witness are not entitled to court 
leave. An employee must be scheduled for paid leave or normal duty in order 
to qualify for court leave. 

43 

 
 
 
 
8-1.  Eligibility 

MILITARY LEAVE 

A.  Full-time permanent employees or non-permanent employees with 
appointments of one year or more are eligible for military leave. 

B.  Employees dishonorably discharged from the military are not eligible for 

military leave. 

C.  Part-time employees with a scheduled tour of duty between 16 and 32 hours 

per week are eligible for prorated military leave. 

D.  Employees with temporary appointments of less than one year are not eligible 
for military leave. However, supervisors must approve requests from any 
employee servicing in one of the uniformed services to use annual leave, 
compensatory time off, LWOP, Absent-US to complete an obligation to the 
military. 

8-2.  Use of Military Leave 

A.  An employee is entitled to time off without a loss of pay for certain types of 
active or inactive duty in the National Guard or as a Reserve of the Armed 
Forces (see 5 U.S.C. § 6323). 

B.  Employees should give advanced written or verbal notice to their supervisors 
according to their office procedures when called for military duty. If a military 
necessity prevents giving advance notice or giving advance notice is 
otherwise impossible or unreasonable, advance notice of military duty is not 
required. However, to use military leave (regular or emergency), the 
employee must provide the supervisor with a copy of the military orders, 
annual drill schedule, or other documentation identifying the dates of the 
military obligation. 

1.  Employees must provide advance notice, but the failure to do so should 
not result in a denial of the leave request for military duty. However, 
management can require employees to follow certain guidelines in 
providing advance notice for future deployments. 

2.  Managers can deny reemployment rights when an employee has failed to 

provide advance notice of a foreseeable military obligation or when 
feasible. 

3.  According to the Department of Labor and the Department of Defense, 

advance notice means as early as possible or feasible, with a 
recommendation that notice should be given at least 30 days in advance. 

C.  Military leave is charged in 1 hour increments. Military leave may only be 

charged for hours that the employee would otherwise have worked for FEMA 
in a pay status. 

44 

 
 
D.  Military leave cannot be charged for regular days off or holidays. When a 
holiday occurs during a period of military leave, the employee will not be 
charged for military leave, but will receive holiday leave for the holiday. 

E.  Employees may not be advanced annual or sick leave during a period of 

active military duty. 

F.  Employees serving on active military duty cannot perform work for FEMA or 

receive compensation for such work during the period of active duty. 

8-3.  Accumulation and Charging of Military Leave 

A.  Full-time employees receive 120 hours of military leave per fiscal year. 

Military leave is not accrued during the year, eligible employees are credited 
with the full 120 hours of military leave on the first day of employment and 
then at the start of each fiscal year on October 1.  

B.  Employees may carry over a maximum of 120 hours of military leave into the 
next fiscal year. Eligible employees may use up to 240 hours of military leave 
in any given fiscal year. If an employee’s military orders require service that 
extends across fiscal years, an employee has the potential to use up to 360 
hours of military leave in a calendar year. 

C.  Employees are not required to return from military duty to a civilian position 

before using military leave earned during a new fiscal year. 

1.  Any new military leave must be associated with military duties. 

2.  For service of 30 days or less, the employee must report to work no later 
than the first regularly scheduled work period on the first full calendar day 
after completion of service or as soon as possible after an 8 hour period if 
reporting (see 38 U.S.C. § 4312(e)(1)(A)(i) and (ii) and (B); 5 C.F.R. § 
353.205(a)). 

3.  For service of 31 to 180 days, employees must submit an application for 
reemployment no later than 14 days after completion of the service, or if 
impossible, the next full calendar day when submission is possible (see 38 
U.S.C. § 4312(e)(1)(C); 5 C.F.R. § 353.205(b)). 

4.  For service of 181 days or more, the employee must submit an application 
no later than 90 days after the completion of the service (see 38 U.S.C. § 
4312(e)(1)(D); 5 C.F.R. §353.205(c) 

D.  The amounts of military leave accrued by part-time employees are pro-rated 

according to their scheduled tour of duty. 

E.  Absences for military duty in excess of an employee’s available military leave 
may be charged to annual leave, compensatory time off, or LWOP at the 
request of the employee. In such circumstances, if an employee does not 
specify a paid leave category, the employee will be placed in a LWOP status. 

45 

 
 
1.  Supervisors must grant an employee’s request to use accrued annual 
leave, compensatory time, or LWOP for absences for military duty in 
excess of available military leave. 

2.  Supervisors must grant an employee’s request to use sick leave for 

absences for military duty in excess of available military leave, but only to 
the extent that the sick leave request compiles with statutes, regulations, 
and FEMA policy on the use of sick leave. 

3.  Supervisors cannot require employees to use accrued leave to cover his 
or her absence in excess of the employee’s available military leave. 

8-4.  Military Leave (Regular) 

A.  Regular military leave allows employees to participate in active duty, active 
duty training, and inactive duty training. Inactive duty training is authorized 
training performed by members of a Reserve component not on active duty 
and performed in connection with the prescribed activities of the Reserve 
component. 

B.  Employees using annual leave or compensatory time off during applicable 

periods of military duty may be entitled to their full civilian pay, as well as their 
military pay if they meet the requirements of 5 U.S.C. § 6323. Generally, if an 
employee chooses to use his or her military leave, then the employee’s 
civilian pay will be reduced by the amount of military pay the employee 
receives for military leave. 

8-5.  Military Leave (Emergency) 

A.  Eligible employees may receive up to 22 workdays of military leave per 

calendar year for emergency duty ordered by the President, the Secretary of 
Defense, or a State Governor. Supervisors must grant leave for absences 
due to military obligations. 

B.  The 22 workdays of emergency military leave is in addition to the 15 

workdays of regular military leave. 

C.  Emergency leave is provided to employees who perform military duties in 
support of civil authorities in the protection of life and property, or who 
perform full-time military service in response to a contingency operation (see 
5 U.S.C. § 6323(b) and 10 U.S.C. § 101(a)(13)). Contingency operations are 
military operations that: 

1.  Are designated by the Secretary of Defense as an operation in which 
members of the Armed Forces are or may become involved in military 
actions, operations, or hostilities against an enemy of the United States or 
against an opposing military force; or 

2.  Results in the call or order to, or retention on, active duty of members of 
the uniformed services under 10 U.S.C. § 688, 12301(a), 12302, 12304, 

46 

 
 
 
12305, 12406; 10 U.S.C. Chapter 15; or any other provision of law during 
a war or during a national emergency declared by the President or 
Congress. 

D.  Employees will have their civilian pay reduced by any military pay received 
during periods of emergency military leave. However, an employee may 
choose not to take military leave and instead use annual leave, compensatory 
time off, or sick leave in order to retain both civilian and military pay. 

47 

 
 
 
9-1.  Earning Home Leave 

HOME LEAVE 

A.  Home leave is earned in the very limited situation where an employee is on a 
foreign duty assignment for the specific purpose of visiting the United States, 
the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, or the territories or possessions of the 
United States. 

B.  Home leave is earned in addition to annual and sick leave. 

C.  Employees begin earning home leave on the date of the employee’s arrival at 
a duty post outside of the United States, or on the date of entrance on duty 
when recruited abroad.  

D.  Employees stop earning home leave on the employee’s date of departure 

from the duty post outside of the United States for separation or reassignment 
in the United States, or the date of separation if the employee separates 
when abroad, whichever occurs first.  

E.  Employees will earn home leave while on a foreign duty assignment including 

periods of: 

1.  Absence in a non-pay status up to 2 workweeks (80 hours) within each 12 

month service period abroad; 

2.  Authorized leave with pay; 

3.  Time spent in the United States Armed Forces which interrupts service 

abroad (but only for eligibility, not leave-earning purposes, see section 9-
1.G.6.); and 

4.  A period of detail. 

F.  Home leave is earned in daily units and will be credited to an employee’s 

leave account in multiples of one day increments (based on an 8 hour day). 

G.  For each 12 months of service abroad, an employee earns home leave at the 

following rate: 

1.  15 days for appointments or positions FEMA requires the incumbent to 

accept assignments anywhere in the world as the needs of FEMA dictate;  

2.  15 days for employees serving with a United States mission to a public 

international organization; 

3.  15 days for serving at foreign posts which FEMA pays a foreign or non-

foreign (but not a tropical) differential of 20 percent or more; 

4.  10 days for posts not covered by 1, 2, or 3, and which FEMA pays a 

foreign or territorial (but not a tropical) differential of at least 10 percent but 
less than 20 percent; 

5.  5 days for posts not included in 1, 2, 3, or 4. 

48 

 
6.  0 days for employees who would earn home leave according to 1, 2, 3, 4, 

or 5, but whose service is interrupted by a tour of duty in the Armed 
Forces for the duration of the tour abroad. 

H.  Home leave may accumulate to a maximum of 45 days. 

I.  For an employee whose foreign duty assignment is interrupted by a tour of 
duty in the Armed Forces of the United States will not accrue home leave 
during the period of active military service. 

J.  When an employee returns to a position in the United States, any unused 
home leave is held in abeyance. If the employee receives another foreign 
duty assignment, the unused home leave will be recredited.  

K.  All unused home leave is forfeited when an employee has a break in Federal 

service of more than 90 calendar days. 

9-2.  Use of Home Leave 

A.  An employee must complete a basis service period of 24 months of 

continuous creditable service outside of the United States before using home 
leave. To use home leave, an employee must be expected to return to the 
foreign duty assignment after a period of home leave. An employee cannot 
terminate a foreign duty assignment while on home leave. 

B.  Home leave may not be the basis for terminal leave or a lump sum payment 

upon separation from FEMA or the Federal Service. 

C.  Home leave is approved at the discretion of the official responsible for 

authorizing leave for the employee. 

D.  The minimum charge for home leave is 1 day and home leave is charged in 1 

day increments. 

E.  Home leave can only be used to visit United States, the Commonwealth of 

Puerto Rico, or the territories or possessions of the United States. 

F.  Home leave may not be charged for holidays, regular non-workdays, and 

non-workdays authorized by administrative order. 

G.  Home leave may be used in conjunction with annual leave, compensatory 

time off, or leave without pay. 

H.  An employee cannot substitute annual leave for periods previously charged to 
home leave to avoid forfeiture of annual leave at the end of the leave year. 

I.  The granting of home leave does not entitle the employee to payment or 

reimbursement of travel or transportation expenses. 

49 

 
 
 
9-3.  Refund of Home Leave 

A.  An employee who does not return to service abroad after a period of home 
leave, or after the completion of an assignment in the United States is 
indebted for the used home leave. 

B.  An employee can satisfy a debt due to used home leave by: 

1.  A charge against the employee’s annual leave; 

2.  A charge against any final salary payments; 

3.  A charge against any other financial assets administered by the Federal 

government; or 

4.  Reimbursing FEMA for the monetary value of the used home leave. 

C.  A refund for this indebtedness is not required if: 

1.  The employee completes more than six months of service in an 

assignment in the United States following the period of home leave; 

2.  When FEMA determines that the employee’s failure to return was due to 
compelling personal reasons of a humanitarian or compassionate nature, 
such as issues involving physical or mental health, or circumstances over 
which the employee has no control; or 

3.  FEMA determines that it is in the public interest to not return the employee 

to an overseas assignment. 

50 

 
 
 
10-1.  Purpose of Excused Absences 

EXCUSED ABSENCE 

Employees may be excused from performing their regular duties for certain 
activities which are considered to be in the interest of the Government. Absences 
may also be granted in certain other special circumstances, such as hazardous 
weather conditions. The administrative leave categories described in this Chapter 
are the only allowable administrative leave categories. Employees shall record 
their time during such absences as either the appropriate administrative leave 
category or official time according to the policies established by this Chapter. 

10-2.  Time-Off Awards 

A Time-Off Award (TOA) is an excused absence granted to an employee to be 
used without charge to leave or loss of pay in recognition of individual or group 
contributions or accomplishments. (See FEMA Manual 255-4-1, Employee 
Awards and Recognition, for more information on the process and limits for 
granting Time-Off Awards). 

A.  TOAs must be granted and used in one hour increments. 

B.  TOAs must be scheduled and used within 26 pay periods from the date the 
TOA was awarded. After the 26th pay period, any unused time off will be 
automatically forfeited and may not be restored or otherwise substituted. 

C.  TOAs have no effect on annual leave carryover limitations. 

D.  TOAs cannot be converted into cash payments under any circumstances (5 

C.F.R. 451.104(f)). 

E.  If an employee separates from FEMA or the Federal service before using all 

time-off hours, any unused time off will be forfeited. 

F.  If an employee transfers to or from another DHS Component, any available 

TOAs will be honored at the employee’s new position. FEMA will not transfer 
TOAs to or from other Federal agencies. 

G.  TOA’s shall not be granted to create the effect of a holiday or treated as 

administrative excusals or leave (i.e., granting the entire organization or office 
a TOA to be used on a specific day). 

10-3.  Voting 

FEMA’s policy is to encourage employees to exercise their voting rights and 
permits a limited amount of excused absence for voting.  

A.  Employees are not allowed administrative leave for voting by absentee ballot. 
Most states allow absentee voting for both primary and general elections. 
Employees are responsible for knowing the election laws for their state. 

51 

 
 
 
B.  Employees must request administrative leave for voting or registering to vote 

in advance. 

C.  As a general rule, where the polls are not open at least 3 hours either before 
or after an employee's regular hours of work he or she may be granted an 
amount of administrative leave which will permit him or her to report for work 
3 hours after the polls open or leave work 3 hours before the polls close, 
whichever requires the lesser amount of time off. 

D.  Under exceptional circumstances, where it is necessary to enable the 

employee to vote, a greater amount of administrative leave may be granted, 
but not to exceed a full day. These exceptions must be noted under "Other 
Leave" on FEMA WebTA and approved by the supervisor in advance. 

E.  If an employee’s voting place is beyond a normal commuting distance and 

voting by absentee ballot is either not permitted or not possible, the employee 
may be granted a maximum of one workday to make the trip to the voting 
place to vote at the discretion of the supervisor. If more than one workday is 
needed the employee may request annual leave, compensatory time off, or 
LWOP for the additional period of absence. Under such circumstances 
employees must request administrative leave at least seven calendar days in 
advance and provide administratively acceptable documentation that 
demonstrates the employee is not permitted to vote absentee. 

F.  Where employees vote in jurisdictions that require registration in person, 

administrative leave may be granted under the same conditions as 
administrative leave for voting. Administrative leave may not be granted if 
registration can be accomplished on a non-work day and the place of 
registration is within a reasonable one day round trip travel distance of the 
employee’s place of residence.  

G.  Employees who take time off to participate in other electoral activities, such 
as serving as election officers, precinct inspectors or clerks, or poll workers 
may not be granted administrative leave for these activities. Any time spent 
during regular duty hours for these activities must be charged to annual leave, 
compensatory time, credit hours, or LWOP if granted. 

10-4.  Absences to Take Examinations 

Employees taking noncompetitive civil service examinations for positions in 
FEMA, examinations established by operating units to determine qualifications 
for promotion, or competitive examinations to qualify for competitive status in the 
positions which they hold in FEMA may be granted administrative leave for the 
time necessary to take the examination, including the time it takes the employee 
to travel to and from the examination site, if that site is not the employee’s normal 
duty station. 

Supervisors may grant administrative leave for the time necessary to take other 
examinations (e.g., a CPA exam, bar exam) which are directly related to the 
employee’s current or prospective duties within FEMA.  

52 

 
 
10-5.  Absences for Job Required Medical Examinations 

An employee may be granted administrative leave to take a medical examination 
officially required in connection with the employee’s continued employment with 
FEMA. 

10-6.  Immediate Treatment of On-the-Job Injuries 

An employee injured on-the-job may be granted administrative leave for an initial 
examination and for immediate treatment by a physician of the employee’s 
choice on the day of the injury. Where local treatment is not available, or for 
employees who are duty stationed outside the continental United States, an 
employee may be excused for a reasonable period for travel to and from the 
nearest medical facility for necessary treatment. 

10-7.  Changes in Tour of Duty During Disasters 

During disasters, some employees may be required to immediately change their 
tour of duty hours. The FEMA Administrator may authorize up to one day of 
administrative leave for employees who are required to change their normal duty 
hours to prepare for or execute emergency response or recovery assignments. 

For example, an employee with a normal tour of duty of Monday through Friday, 
8:30 am to 5:30 pm, is given an emergency assignment on Tuesday from 7:00 
pm to 7:00 am through the rest of the week. On Thursday at noon, the 
emergency is cancelled and the employee is told not to report to the emergency 
assignment, but to report back to his or her normal workplace at 8:30 am on 
Friday. The employee may be granted administrative leave for the Thursday, so 
the employee does not suffer a loss of leave or pay due to the emergency 
assignment. 

10-8.  Emergency or Hazardous Weather Conditions 

Administrative Leave may be granted, subject to the restrictions found in FEMA’s 
Telework and CORE Manuals, due to hazardous weather conditions or other 
emergencies. 

A.  When weather or emergency conditions result in OPM announcing a delayed 
arrival, non-emergency employees will be excused without charge to leave or 
loss of pay for the period from normal arrival time at work until the revised 
expected arrival time at work. Employees who arrive later than their expected 
arrival time will be charged annual leave or LWOP for the additional period of 
absence from work. Tardiness beyond the expected arrival time may be 
excused at the discretion of the leave-approving official if the employee made 
a reasonably diligent effort to arrive at work on time. Employees on previously 
approved scheduled leave for the entire day remain in the same leave status 

53 

 
 
 
 
 
and are not granted excused absence for the period from their normal 
departure time to the revised arrival time. 

B.  When weather or emergency conditions result in OPM announcing an early 
dismissal in which employees will be dismissed a set period of time earlier 
than their normal departure times. Employees who are in a duty status at the 
time an early dismissal is announced will be excused without charge to leave 
or loss of pay for the remainder of the work day, even if they were scheduled 
to take leave later in the day. 

1.  Employees who are in a duty status at the time an early dismissal is 

announced but leave before their authorized dismissal with supervisor 
approval (but not due to a hardship) shall be charged annual leave or 
LWOP for the remainder of the scheduled workday. 

2.  Employees who fail to report to work before the authorized early dismissal 

shall be charged annual leave or AWOL for the entire workday. 

3.  Employees on previously approved leave shall continue to be charged for 

leave for the entire workday. 

4.  Employees scheduled to return from leave after an early dismissal is 
announced but before their authorized dismissal, shall continue to be 
charged with leave until their dismissal time. Absence after the dismissal 
time shall be charged as excused absence even if the employee is 
scheduled to take leave later in the day. 

5.  Employees scheduled to report to work after an early dismissal is 

announced may be granted excused absence for the remainder of the 
workday even if they were scheduled to take leave later in the day. 

C.  When a weather or emergency conditions results in the closing of all or part of 
FEMA’s activities, employees who work in the offices affected by the closing 
may be granted administrative leave, subject to the policies detailed in this 
Section, FEMA’s Telework Manual (see Telework Manual, 123-9-1) and 
CORE Manual (see CORE Manual, 252-11-1).  

1.  Employees on pre-approved paid leave on a day when a FEMA office is 
closed will not have their leave cancelled and granted administrative 
leave. In such cases, employees will remain in their pre-approved leave 
category. Employees on LWOP pending disability, in receipt of workers’ 
compensation, military leave, on suspension, or in a non-pay status on the 
workday immediately before and the first workday after the closure will 
also not be granted administrative leave. 

2.  If a FEMA facility is closed due to inclement weather or other 

emergencies, COREs who would normally work at that location will be 
directed to work at an alternate work location or their telework site if they 
have a current telework agreement. In such circumstances, COREs will 
only be granted administrative leave if an emergency affects their 
alternate or telework location (i.e., loss of power, loss of heat, loss of 
internet connectivity, etc.). 

54 

 
3.  Unscheduled telework is incorporated into FEMA’s emergency 

preparedness operations to maintain productivity and help ensure the 
safety of the Federal workforce and the public.  

a.  When a FEMA facility is open, but employees are given the option of 

unscheduled annual leave, LWOP, or telework, the following 
procedures apply: 

i.  Emergency Employees must report for duty as directed unless they 
are telework ready and permitted to telework by their supervisors. 

ii.  Non-Emergency Employees shall report to work or notify their 

supervisors in advance if they intend to take unscheduled leave. 

iii.  Non-Emergency Telework Ready Employees must report to work, 

commence telework, or request unscheduled leave. 

b.  When a FEMA facility is closed employees will be granted 

administrative leave for the number of hours they were scheduled to 
work unless they are covered by one of the following categories: 

i.  Emergency Employees must report for duty as directed unless they 
are telework ready and permitted to telework by their supervisors. 

ii.  Non-Emergency Telework Ready Employees who are already 
scheduled to telework or who are directed by FEMA to perform 
unscheduled telework must telework the entire work day. If directed 
to telework, such employees may request the use of annual leave, 
compensatory time off, credit hours, or sick leave, as appropriate; 
leave without pay; their flexible work schedule day off or revision of 
their work hours under flexible work schedules. 

iii.  COREs will be directed to work at an alternate work location or at 

their approved telework site if they have a current telework 
agreement. 

4.  Supervisors may excuse telework ready employees from work and grant 
annual or administrative leave, as appropriate, when an emergency 
adversely affects an employee’s telework site (e.g., disruption of 
electricity, loss of heat, loss of connectivity, etc.), or if the teleworker faces 
a personal hardship that prevents him or her from teleworking effectively. 
Dependent care needs do not ordinarily entitle a teleworker to 
administrative leave; annual leave will be granted as appropriate. 

10-9.  Veterans Attending Funeral Services 

An employee who is a veteran of a war, a veteran of a campaign or expedition for 
which a campaign badge has been authorized, or a member of an honor or 
ceremonial group of an organization of those veterans, may be granted 
administrative leave for the time necessary, not to exceed 4 hours in any one 
day, to participate as an active pallbearer, a member of a firing squad, or a guard 

55 

 
 
of honor in a funeral ceremony for a member of the Armed Forces whose 
remains are returned from abroad for final internment in the United States (5 
U.S.C. 6321). 

10-10. Funerals of Immediate Relatives in the Armed Forces 

A.  An employee is entitled to up to 3 days of administrative leave to make 
arrangements for, or attend the funeral or memorial service of a family 
member who died as a result of wounds, disease, or injury incurred while 
serving as a member of the Armed Forces in a combat zone (5 U.S.C. 6326). 

B.  The 3 days must be within the employee’s established tour of duty, including 
regularly scheduled overtime. The 3 days need not be taken on consecutive 
days, but the employee must provide a justification for use of funeral leave on 
nonconsecutive days. 

10-11. Attending Funerals of Fellow Federal Law Enforcement Officers 

A Federal law enforcement officer or a Federal firefighter may be excused from 
duty to attend the funeral of a fellow Federal law enforcement officer or Federal 
firefighter who was killed in the line of duty. When an employee is excused from 
duty, attendance at such a memorial service shall be considered to be an official 
duty of the officer or firefighter (5 U.S.C. 6328). 

10-12. Return from Active Military Service 

A.  Employees who are members of the National Guard or Reserves that are 
called to active duty in support of the Overseas Contingency Operations 
(OCO) (formerly the Global War on Terrorism) are entitled to 5 days of 
administrative leave upon their return from active duty. The entitlement 
applies to all employees, regardless of whether they are deployed overseas 
or stateside. The 5 days of excused absence are prorated for employees on 
uncommon tours of duty (see Executive Order 13223). 

B.  Employees must have been on active duty in support of OCO for at least 42 

consecutive days to be eligible for leave. 

C.  Employees may not be granted more than 5 days of administrative leave in a 
12 month period. The 12 month period begins on the first day of the excused 
absence and ends 365 days later. 

D.  The 5 days of leave must be used for a continuous period immediately upon 

an employee’s return to civilian duty. 

E.  The 5 days of leave must be granted as soon as an employee reports back 

for civilian duty or notifies FEMA of an intent to return to civilian duty. 

F.  The 5 days of leave may not be “banked” for use at a future time. 

56 

 
 
 
 
G.  Employees who separate prior to being granted the excused absence for this 
purpose do not have an entitlement to payment for any time not granted. 

10-13. Notice Period Preceding a Reduction in Force 

Employees who have received a general or specific notice of reduction in force 
may be granted administrative leave to attend interviews for other prospective 
positions within FEMA or another DHS component during the notice period. If 
administrative leave is granted, the amount of administrative leave is limited to 
the duration of the scheduled interview. Administrative leave may not be granted 
for any travel associated with attending an interview. 

10-14. Health and Fitness Programs 

To the extent FEMA has a current health and fitness program policy (FD 119-6, 
Employee Physical Fitness Program, February 1, 2012), supervisors may, at 
their discretion, grant limited leave for participation subject to the provisions of 
that policy. 

10-15. Blood Donations 

Employees who donate blood, including platelet donations, to the Red Cross, 
local hospitals, blood banks, or similar nonprofit organizations, may be granted 
administrative leave of up to 4 hours, once every three months. The 4 hours 
includes the time required to travel to and from the donation center, and to 
actually give the donation. If the employee is not accepted for blood donation, 
only the time necessary for the trip to and from the blood center is allowed as an 
excused absence. Time in excess of four hours may be granted at the 
employee’s request as annual leave, sick leave, compensatory time off if 
available, or LWOP. 

10-16. Bone Marrow and Organ Donations 

A.  An employee is entitled to up to 30 days of leave per calendar year in addition 
to annual leave, sick leave, LWOP, or any other applicable leave categories 
available to an employee for organ donation and recovery. 

B.  An employee is entitled to up to 7 days of leave per calendar year in addition 
to annual leave, sick leave, LWOP, or any other applicable leave categories 
available to an employee for bone marrow donation and recovery. An 
employee may not be excused for bone marrow donation for their own future 
use. 

C.  With supervisory approval, employees may use annual leave, sick leave, 
advanced annual or sick leave, accrued compensatory or credit time off if 

57 

 
 
 
 
 
available, or LWOP for additional recovery time in excess of the 30 days for 
organ donation or 7 days for bone marrow donation. 

D.  Supervisors may approve, at their discretion, short periods of annual or sick 
leave for employees to participate in screening activities to become potential 
bone marrow or organ donors. 

E.  Leave for bone marrow or organ donation, but not screening activities, is a 
separate category of leave that is in addition to annual and sick leave. 

10-17. Absence to Perform Community Service 

Employee absence to perform community or other voluntary service should be 
charged to annual leave, compensatory time off if available, credit hours if 
available, or LWOP. However, in some rare circumstances it may be appropriate 
to grant employees administrative leave to participate in community service 
activities if: 

1.  It is directly related to FEMA’s mission; 

2.  It is officially sponsored or sanctioned by the FEMA Administrator (i.e., 

specific disaster relief activities.); 

3.  It will clearly enhance the professional development or skills of the employee 

in his/her current position;  

4.  The employee’s supervisor determines, in his or her discretion, that the 

employee’s absence will not adversely affect the operations of the office; and 

5.  The absence is brief and is determined to be in the interest of FEMA. 

10-18. Administrative Proceedings 

Employees called to testify or provide sworn statements at hearings conducted 
by the Office of Special Counsel, the Merit Systems Protection Board, the Equal 
Employment Opportunity Commission, or arbitrators or grievance examiners 
appointed in federal agency employment disputes are in official duty status while 
testifying and no grant of excused absence will be recorded. Employees are in 
official duty status for the presentation of, but not the preparation for 
administrative grievances. 

10-19. Equal Employment Opportunity Complaints 

A.  A reasonable amount official time must be granted to employees who are 
pursuing their own EEO complaint against FEMA, or who have been 
approved to represent other FEMA employees who are pursuing an EEO 
complaint against FEMA to file a complaint, respond to agency or EEOC 
requests, and when the employee’s presence is authorized or required by the 
EEOC if otherwise on duty. Employees are considered in official duty status 
for such activities and no grant of excused absence will be recorded. 

58 

 
 
 
 
B.  The employee and his or her supervisor should discuss the amount of time is 
reasonable for preparation at least five business days prior to the employee 
using such time. The employee should notify their supervisor of the need for 
official time and the amount of time needed for upcoming meetings and 
hearings with agency officials or with EEOC Administrative Judges within 
three business days after the meeting or hearing is scheduled to allow the 
supervisor to schedule for the normal operations of the office. 

C.  Official time will not be granted to employees pursuing EEO complaints 
against other Federal agencies, or serving as representatives in such 
complaints. Absences related to such complaints must be charged to annual 
leave, compensatory time if available, or LWOP. 

59 

 
 
 
11-1.  Use of LWOP 

LEAVE WITHOUT PAY 

A.  Leave without pay (LWOP) is a temporary non-pay status and absence from 
duty that may be granted at the employee’s request. In most instances, 
granting LWOP is a matter of supervisory discretion and granting LWOP 
should be done sparingly, however, there are certain situations when 
employees are entitled to LWOP (see section 11-2). 

B.  LWOP must be requested and approved in advance before taking LWOP. 

Failure to do so will result in an unauthorized absence. 

C.  LWOP may not be charged for periods of unauthorized absence. Absence 

Without Leave (AWOL) is used for unauthorized absences. 

D.  Employees may be required to exhaust available annual leave before being 

granted LWOP if the absence is primarily for the personal convenience of the 
employee. 

E.  LWOP is charged in 15 minute increments. 

F.  LWOP is not ordinarily approved for periods longer than 12 months at a time, 

except in situations which are in the best interests of FEMA or the U.S. 
Government, such as Peace Corps volunteers. 

G.  LWOP may not be retroactively substituted for annual or sick leave (see 58 

Comp. Gen. 661). 

H.  Employees may not be granted LWOP for the sole purpose of pursuing or 

engaging in outside employment. Outside employment includes any position 
or opportunity, including internships, for which the employee receives a 
monetary payment.  

11-2.  Required LWOP Situations 

Employees are entitled to LWOP under the following circumstances: 

A.  The Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (FMLA), provides covered 

employees with an entitlement to a total of up to 12 weeks of unpaid leave 
(LWOP) during any 12-month period for certain family and medical needs 
(see Chapters 5 and 6 and 5 C.F.R. Part 630, Subpart L). 

B.  The Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act of 1994, 
provides employees with an entitlement to LWOP when employment with 
FEMA is interrupted by a period of service in the uniformed service (see 5 
C.F.R. § 353.106). 

C.  Executive Order 5396, dated July 17, 1930, provides that disabled veterans 

are entitled to LWOP for necessary medical treatment. 

D.  Employees receiving workers’ compensation payments from the Department 

of Labor must be placed in an LWOP status. 

60 

 
 
11-3.  Approving LWOP 

A.  An employee’s immediate supervisor may only approve LWOP of up to 80 

hours. 

B.  Heads of Offices or Directorates must approve any periods of LWOP 

exceeding 80 hours. 

C.  Heads of Offices or Directorates may approve up to six months of LWOP. 
Extensions of LWOP over six months must be approved by OCCHCO. 

D.  If the period of LWOP is more than 30 calendar days, an SF-52 is required to 

provide documentation in the employee’s Official Personnel Folder. 

E.  When approving extended periods of LWOP, there should be a reasonable 
expectation that the employee will return to duty at the conclusion of the 
period of LWOP. 

11-4.  LWOP for Family Obligations 

Supervisors are allowed, at their discretion, to approve up to 24 hours of LWOP 
per year for employees to balance the demands of family and work. LWOP for 
general family care purposes differs from LWOP under FMLA in that LWOP for 
general family purposes is not an entitlement and must be approved by an 
employee’s supervisor, and there is no right to substitute paid leave for unpaid 
leave used. An employee may be granted up to 24 hours of LWOP, if other leave 
is not available to: 

A.  Attend school and early childhood educational activities that are directly 
related to the educational advancement of an employee’s child, such as 
tutoring or attending school board meetings. Schools under this heading refer 
to elementary and secondary schools, Head Start programs, or child-care 
facilities. 

B.  Accompany child to routine medical, dental, or optical appointments when no 

sick leave is available. 

C.  Accompany elderly relatives to routine medical, dental, optical, or other 

professional service appointments that are directly related to the care of an 
elderly relative. LWOP for this purpose is in addition to an employee’s 
entitlement to sick leave for general family care and LWOP under FMLA. 

11-5.  Extended Use of LWOP 

Extended periods of LWOP may be authorized sparingly if the value to FEMA, 
the U.S. Government, or the serious personal needs of the employee are 
sufficient to offset the costs and administrative inconveniences involved, 
including encumbrance of a position, loss of needed services, complication of 
retention registers for reduction in force, obligation to provide employment at the 
end of the period of leave, and credit for six months of each year of absence 

61 

 
 
 
toward retirement (or full credit for those in receipt of disability compensation). If 
the circumstances warrant an extended LWOP subject to the approving 
requirements above, extended periods of LWOP may be authorized for: 

A.  Education that contributes to the interests or mission of FEMA; 

B.  Recovery from illness or disability not of a permanent nature, when continued 
employment or immediate return to employment might impair the employee’s 
health or the health of other employees; or 

C.  If the disability or disease is one for which the employee is being 

compensated by the Department of Labor under 5 U.S.C. Chapter 81, LWOP 
in excess of one year may be granted in increments appropriate to the 
employee’s prospects for recovery. 

11-6.  Effect of LWOP on Employee Benefits 

A.  If an employee is in a non-pay status for an entire pay period, the employee 
will not earn annual or sick leave for that pay period. Periods in a non-pay 
status are calculated on a cumulative basis during a leave year. For every 80 
hours in a LWOP status, an employee’s annual and sick leave amounts will 
be reduced by the amount of leave the employee would have earned during 
that pay period.  

B.  Employees on LWOP due to a compensable on-the-job injury will not earn 

annual or sick leave while in a LWOP status. 

C.  Employees cannot be paid for a legal holiday if they are in a non-pay status 
on the workday before and workday after a holiday. Employees who are on 
extended periods of LWOP may not return to duty for the sole reason of being 
paid for a holiday. 

D.  Employees may continue to receive health insurance under the Federal 
Employees Health Benefit (FEHB) program for up to 365 days while in a 
LWOP status. Employees are still obligated to pay their portion of their health 
premiums while they are in a non-pay status. 

E.  Employees covered by the Federal Employees Group Life Insurance (FEGLI) 
will automatically retain their coverage at no cost for up to 365 days while in a 
LWOP status. After 365 days, employees will have the option to convert their 
FEGLI coverage to an individual life insurance policy and pay all premiums. 

F.  Periods of LWOP in excess of six months in a calendar year will be deducted 
from creditable service toward retirement, except for absences for military 
duty or caused by a compensable on-the-job injury (see 5 U.S.C § 8332(f)). 

G.  Employees will not be able to contribute to their Thrift Savings Plan (TSP) 

during periods of LWOP. 

H.  For employees covered by the Federal Employees Retirement System 
(FERS), the Federal Government will discontinue contributions, both 
automatic and matching, to an employee’s account. 

62 

 
 
I.  Unless the LWOP is taken for military duty or as a result of a compensable 
on-the-job injury, the waiting period for a within grade increase will be 
extended by the amount of time which exceeds (see 5 C.F.R. § 531.406): 

1.  Two work weeks if the employee is at step 1, 2, or 3; 

2.  Four work weeks if the employee is at step 4, 5, or 6; or 

3.  Six work weeks if the employee is at step 7, 8, or 9. 

J.  For more information on the effects of LWOP and other non-pay categories 

have on salary and benefits see Appendix C. 

63 

 
 
 
VOLUNTARY LEAVE TRANSFER PROGRAM 

12-1.  Program Description and Eligibility 

A.  The Voluntary Leave Transfer Program (VLTP) allows eligible employees to 
donate annual leave or receive donated annual leave from other Federal 
employees in response to a medical emergency. 

B.  A leave recipient must face a substantial loss of income and use or expect to 
use all of his or her accrued annual and sick leave in response to a medical 
emergency. 

C.  Employees cannot donate leave to an immediate supervisor, any individual in 

their supervisory or management chain of command, or any other 
management official within FEMA having an influence or input on personnel 
actions involving the leave donor. 

D.  Employees may not solicit personal donations for leave, directly or indirectly, 

from other employees. 

E.  Employees will not be eligible for the VLTP for any of the following purposes: 

1.  Caring for or bonding with a healthy newborn child; 

2.  Recuperating from elective or cosmetic surgery; or 

3.  Absences related to bereavement. 

12-2.  Application to be a Leave Recipient 

A.  Employees seeking donated leave must submit an application including: 

1.  The name, position title, and grade or pay level of the leave recipient; 

2.  The reasons why donated leave is requested, including a description of 

the nature, severity, and anticipated duration of the medical emergency. If 
the medical emergency is a reoccurring condition, the employee must 
state the approximate frequency and duration of each reoccurrence;  

3.  A copy of the employee’s current annual and sick leave balance; and 

4.  Certification by the employee’s physician(s) or experts attesting to the 

nature of the medical emergency. 

B.  If the employee is unable to complete the application, a personal 

representative of the employee may prepare and submit an application on the 
employee’s behalf. 

12-3.  Approval 

A.  Employees, or their representative, will submit an application to become a 

leave recipient to the employee’s supervisor of record.  

64 

 
 
 
B.  The supervisor of record will review the application to ensure the employee 
meets the eligibility criteria: the employee will be absent from duty without 
available paid leave for at least 24 hours or 30% of the employee’s average 
biweekly scheduled tour of duty (for part-time employees or employees with 
an uncommon tour of duty), and the absence is due to a medical emergency 
affecting the employee or a covered family member. 

C.  The employee’s supervisor of record will submit approved applications to 

OCCHCO. OCCHCO will review the application and notify the employee or 
representative if the application is approved. If the application is not 
approved, OCCHCO will state the reason(s) for the disapproval. 

D.  Leave donors may only donate leave to an employee after an employee’s 

application is approved. 

12-4.  Transfer of Annual Leave 

A.  Once an employee is approved to receive donated leave, other FEMA 

employees may submit a written request to donate a specified number of 
annual leave hours to an eligible leave recipient.  

B.  Transferred annual leave may be used retroactively for periods of LWOP or to 
liquate a debt of advanced annual or sick leave associated with the medical 
emergency. 

C.  Usually, FEMA will only transfer donated leave between FEMA employees. 
However, FEMA will accept leave donations through the VLTP under the 
following circumstances: 

1.  When a family member of the leave recipient is employed by another 
agency and requests to transfer annual leave to the leave recipient; 

2.  When OCCHCO determines that the amount of leave available for transfer 
from other FEMA employees may not be sufficient to meet the needs of 
the leave recipient; or 

3.  When OCCHCO determines that accepting leave donations from other 

agencies would further the purpose of the VLTP. 

12-5.  Donations of Annual Leave 

A.  A leave donor must donate at least one hour of leave and in increments of 

one hour. 

B.  A leave donor can only donate annual leave. 

C.  A leave donor may donate no more than one-half of the amount of annual 

leave he or she will earn during the leave year. 

D.  A leave donor who is projected to have leave subject to forfeiture may donate 
the lesser of one-half of the amount of leave the donor will accrue during the 

65 

 
 
 
leave year or the amount of leave the donor is scheduled to accrue until the 
end of the leave year. 

12-6.  Use of Transferred Annual Leave 

A.  A leave recipient must use all of his or her annual, sick, or other available 
paid leave accrued or accumulated before using any transferred leave.  

B.  Leave recipients may only use donated leave for the medical emergency 

stated in the leave application. 

12-7.  Accrual of Annual and Sick Leave 

An employee using donated leave will continue to accrue annual and sick leave, 
at the employee’s normal rate, until the employee accrues forty hours of annual 
and sick leave (or in the case of an employee with an uncommon tour of duty, the 
average number of hours in the employee’s weekly scheduled tour of duty). In 
the case of annual leave, the employee will accrue annual leave to the extent 
necessary to reduce any indebtedness caused by an advance of annual leave. 
The accrued annual and sick leave will be placed in a set aside account during 
the period of the medical emergency. A leave recipient may use such leave after 
the end of the medical emergency or if all donated leave is exhausted.  

12-8.  Termination of the Medical Emergency 

The medical emergency ends when: 

A.  The leave recipient notifies OCCHCO in writing that the medical emergency 

no longer exists; 

B.  OCCHCO determines, after written notice and opportunity  for the leave 
recipient (or, if appropriate, another person acting on behalf of the leave 
recipient) to answer orally or in writing, that the medical emergency no longer 
exists; 

C.  OCCHCO receives notice that the leave recipient is approved for a disability 

retirement; or 

D.  The leave recipient separates from FEMA. 

12-9.  Restoration of Transferred Annual Leave 

A.  When the medical emergency affecting a leave recipient ends, any remaining 
donated leave shall be restored on a prorated basis to the appropriate leave 
donors. 

B.  Donated leave will not be restored if: 

1.  The amount of leave to be restored is less than one hour; or 

66 

 
 
 
 
 
2.  If the leave donor retires, dies, or separates from FEMA before the date 

OCCHCO is notified that donated leave is eligible for restoration. 

C.  The leave donor may elect to receive the restored leave by: 

1.  Crediting such leave to the annual leave account for the current leave 

year; 

2.  Crediting such leave to annual leave account effective as of the first day of 

the first leave year beginning after the date of the election; or 

3.  Donating such leave, in whole or in part, to another leave recipient. 

12-10. Prohibition of Coercion 

A.  The decision to donate leave must be completely voluntary. An employee 
may not directly or indirectly intimidate, threaten, coerce, or promise any 
benefit to any other employee for the purpose of influencing or interfering with 
any employee’s decision to donate, receive, or use annual leave. 

B.  For the purpose of paragraph A of this section, the terms "intimidate, threaten, 
or coerce" includes promising to confer or conferring any benefit (such as an 
appointment, promotion, or compensation) or effecting or threatening to effect 
any reprisal (such as deprivation of appointment, promotion, or 
compensation). 

67 

 
 
 
 
13-1.  Transfer of Leave 

TRANSFER AND RECREDIT OF LEAVE 

A.  When an employee transfers between positions with the same leave system 
as FEMA, without a break in service, the agency the employee is transferring 
from shall certify the employee’s annual leave account to the employing 
agency for credit or recharge (see 5 U.S.C. 6306, 5 C.F.R. 630.501, and 5 
C.F.R. 630.502). 

B.  When an employee transfers between positions with a different leave system 
than FEMA’s, without a break in service, 7 calendar days of annual leave are 
deemed equal to 5 workdays of annual leave (5 C.F.R. 630.501). 

C.  Only annual leave in whole hour units may be transferred between Federal 

agencies. 

13-2.  Recredit of Sick Leave 

A.  When an employee transfers between positions with the same sick leave 
system as FEMA, without a break in service, the agency the employee is 
transferring from shall certify the employee’s sick leave account to the 
employing agency for credit or recharge (see 5 C.F.R. § 630.502(a)). 

B.  When an employee transfers between positions with a different leave system 
than FEMA’s, without a break in service, 7 calendar days of annual leave are 
deemed equal to 5 workdays of annual leave (5 C.F.R. 630.502 (d)). 

C.  An employee who has had a break in service is entitled to a recredit to sick 

leave (without regard to the date of his or her separation), if he or she returns 
to Federal employment on or after December 2, 1994, unless the sick leave 
was forfeited upon reemployment in the Federal Government before 
December 2, 1994 (5 C.F.R. 630.502 (b)). 

D.  Only sick leave in whole hour units may be transferred between Federal 

agencies. 

68 

 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX A: LEAVE AT A GLANCE 

The following chart provides descriptions and examples for some of the leave 
categories available to employees.  

Leave 
Annual 
Leave 

Description 
Paid absence from duty for vacations, 
rest, relaxation, conducting personal 
business, sickness and injuries, and 
family needs. 

Sick Leave  Paid absence from duty for medical, 

dental, or optical examinations or 
treatment; incapacitation by physical 
or mental illness, injuries, pregnancy, 
or childbirth; preventing the spread of 
communicable diseases that would 
jeopardize the health of others while 
on duty; or adoption-related activities. 

FMLA 

Employees are entitled to 12 
administrative work weeks of unpaid 
leave during a 12-month period, if 
FMLA is invoked, for birth and care 
for a newborn; adopting a son or 
daughter; becoming a foster parent; 
care of a spouse, son, daughter, or 
parent with a serious health condition; 
treatment or care of the employee’s 

69 

Example 
  Developing a close 

relationship with an infant or 
making child care 
arrangements. 

  Attend the funeral of a 

friend. 

  Taking your car to be 

repaired. 

  Being incapacitated or 
recuperating from child 
birth. 

  Meeting with adoption 

lawyer. 

  Developing a close 

relationship with newly 
adopted child when 
required by the courts or an 
adoption agency. 

  Making funeral 

arrangements or attending 
a memorial service of a 
family member. 

  Taking a family member to 
medical, dental, or optical 
appointments. 

  Caring for a family member 

with an illness. 

  Caring for your spouse or 
partner who is recovering 
from childbirth. 

  The birth and care for a 

newborn child. 

  The placement of a son or 

daughter with the employee 
for adoption or foster care. 
  The care of a spouse, son, 
daughter, or parent with a 
serious health condition. 
  Recovering from a serious 

health condition. 

 
 
 
 
LWOP for 
Family 
Needs 

serious health condition. Paid leave 
may be substituted. 

Supervisors are encouraged to allow 
employees to take up to 24 hours of 
LWOP per year, if the employee 
exhausts his or her paid leave, to 
participate in school activities directly 
related to the educational 
advancement of their children; 
accompany their children to routine 
medical appointments; care for an 
elderly relative who may require daily 
care or assistance. 

  Responding to a qualifying 
exigency associated with 
the employee’s spouse, 
son, daughter, or parent 
active duty in the military. 

  Parent/Teacher 
conferences. 

  School sponsored activities 

 

such as sports and 
recreation programs, field 
trips, class plays, “career 
day”, or other volunteer 
activities. 
Interviewing for a new 
school/child care facility. 
  Helping an elderly relative 
who may require daily care 
or assistance in making 
arrangements for housing, 
meals, telephones, banking 
service, and other similar 
activities. 

70 

 
 
 
 
APPENDIX B: HOME LEAVE 

The following chart outlines the number of Home Leave days earned after each month 
of service abroad based on appointment type. 

Months of service 
abroad 

Home Leave Days Earned After Each Month of Service 

Maximum 15 
days 

Maximum 10 
days 

Maximum 5 days 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

1 

2 

3 

5 

6 

7 

8 

10 

11 

12 

13 

15 

0 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

0 

0 

1 

1 

2 

2 

2 

3 

3 

4 

4 

5 

71 

 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX C: LWOP 

The following chart outlines some of the effects that the use of LWOP and other non-
pay categories have on salary and benefits. 

Topic 

Number of Days/Hours in a Non-Pay Status Allowed 
Without a Penalty 

Initial Appointment 
Probationary Period 

Any non-pay time in excess of 22 workdays extends the 
probationary period by that number of days. 

Supervisory/Managerial 
Probationary Period 

Any non-pay time in excess of 22 workdays extends the 
probationary period by that number of days. 

Career Tenure 

Leave 

Service Credit for 
Annual Leave Accrual 
(advancement to 
earning 6 and 8 hours 
per pay period) 

Any non-pay time in excess of 30 calendar days for each 
period of absence extends the service date for career 
tenure by that number of days. 

If an employee is in a non-pay status for an entire pay 
period, no annual or sick leave is earned for that pay period. 
If non-pay time occurs during part of one or more of a full-
time employee’s pay periods, the employee continues to 
earn leave until the non-pay time totals 80 hours. Then 
leave is reduced by the amount the employee earns during 
a pay period. 
6 months of non-pay time is creditable. Advancement to 
higher leave accrual category is delayed by the amount of 
non-pay time in excess of 6 months in one calendar year. 

General Schedule 
Within-grade Increases 

Waiting Period 
For steps 2/3/4- 52 weeks 

For steps 5/6/7- 104 weeks 

For steps 8/9/10-156 weeks 

Federal Wage System 
Within-grade Increases 

Waiting Period 
For step 2 - 26 weeks 

For step 3 - 78 weeks 

For steps 4/5 - 104 weeks 

Non-pay Time Allowed 
2 workweeks (80 hrs for FT 
employees) 
4 workweeks (160 hrs for FT 
employees) 
6 workweeks (240 hrs for FT 
employees) 

Non-pay Time Allowed 
1 workweek (40 hours for FT 
employees) 
3 workweeks (120 hrs for FT 
employees) 
4 workweeks (160 hrs for FT 
employees) 

72 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Federal Employees 
Group Life (FEGLI) 
Coverage 

FEGLI Coverage continues without cost to the employee for 
up to 12 months in non-pay status. Coverage is terminated 
after employee has been in non-pay status for 12 months. 
(Previous time in non-pay status counts toward the 12 
months if the employee does not return to duty in between 
periods of non-pay status for at least 4 consecutive 
months.) 

Federal Employee 
Health Benefits (FEHB) 
Coverage 

Unless the employee cancels or temporarily terminates the 
enrollment, coverage generally continues for up to 365 days 
in non-pay status. During periods of LWOP, the employee is 
liable for his or her full share of the premiums for this period. 

Retirement 

6 months of non-pay time is creditable service. Service 
credit is adjusted by the amount of non-pay time in excess 
of 6 months in one calendar year. 

73 

 
 
 
FEMA MANUAL 252-0-1 
DETAIL PROGRAM 

APPROVAL DATE: 09/22/2015  

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 

FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY 

OFFICE OF THE CHIEF COMPONENT HUMAN CAPITAL OFFICER

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Foreword 

This Manual provides guidance and policy direction for the administration, 
implementation, and oversight of the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s 
(FEMA) Detail Program. 

A detail is a temporary assignment to a different position or unclassified duties for a 
specified period when the employee is expected to return to his or her regular duties at 
the end of the assignment. Details are an effective tool to enable FEMA to meet mission 
requirements and allow employees to gain experience performing different roles and 
responsibilities. Details may be used to satisfy emergency workloads, complete short-
term or special projects, minimize the use of overtime due to temporary staffing 
shortages, maintain positions pending a reduction-in-force or reorganization, or to 
accomplish FEMA or DHS operational needs. 

Managers and supervisors must use the policies and procedures prescribed herein to 
ensure details are made in accordance with applicable Federal laws and regulations. 

2 

 
 
 
Table of Contents 

Foreword ......................................................................................................................... 2 

 GENERAL INFORMATION ...................................................................... 5 

1-1.  Purpose ................................................................................................................ 5 

1-2.  Applicability and Scope ........................................................................................ 5 

1-3.  Supersession ........................................................................................................ 5 

1-4.  Authorities/References ......................................................................................... 5 

1-5.  Policy .................................................................................................................... 7 

1-6.  Definitions ............................................................................................................. 7 

1-7.  Responsibilities ..................................................................................................... 9 

1-8.  Forms Prescribed ............................................................................................... 13 

1-9.  Questions ........................................................................................................... 13 

 INTRODUCTION TO DETAILS .............................................................. 14 

2-1.  Purpose of Details .............................................................................................. 14 

2-2.  Types of Details .................................................................................................. 14 

 INTERNAL FEMA DETAILS .................................................................. 16 

3-1.  General Provisions ............................................................................................. 16 

3-2.  Ability to Detail an Employee .............................................................................. 17 

3-3.  Non-Competitive Details ..................................................................................... 17 

3-4.  Competitive Details ............................................................................................. 18 

3-5.  Competitive Procedures ..................................................................................... 18 

3-6.  SES Details ........................................................................................................ 18 

3-7.  Supervisory Status ............................................................................................. 19 

3-8.  Work Schedule and Telework ............................................................................. 19 

3-9.  Performance Management ................................................................................. 19 

3-10.  Discipline and Adverse Actions .......................................................................... 20 

3-11.  Reduction-in-Force, Transfer of Function, and Rightsizing ................................. 20 

 CORE DETAILS ..................................................................................... 21 

4-1.  Details to Perform Stafford Act Activities ............................................................ 21 

4-2.  Non-Stafford Act Mission and Operational Details .............................................. 21 

4-3.  Non-Stafford Act Training Details ....................................................................... 21 

4-4.  Restrictions on the Use of Non-Stafford Act Details ........................................... 22 

3 

 
 
 EXTERNAL DETAILS ............................................................................ 23 

5-1. 

Introduction ......................................................................................................... 23 

5-2.  White House ....................................................................................................... 23 

5-3.  Congress ............................................................................................................ 23 

5-4.  DHS or DHS Components .................................................................................. 23 

5-5.  Other Federal Agencies ...................................................................................... 24 

5-6. 

International Organizations ................................................................................. 24 

5-7. 

Intergovernmental Personnel Act Assignments .................................................. 24 

5-8.  Memorandums of Agreement ............................................................................. 25 

 RECORDKEEPING AND REPORTING ................................................. 27 

6-1.  Recordkeeping and Reporting ............................................................................ 27 

4 

 
  
GENERAL INFORMATION 

1-1.  Purpose 

This Manual establishes the policies and procedures for FEMA’s Detail Program. 
FEMA will achieve consistency and effective management of employee details 
through the implementation of the policies and procedures set forth in this 
Manual. 

1-2.  Applicability and Scope 

This Manual covers details involving competitive and excepted service 
employees, and career SES members. 

This Manual does not apply to details involving Schedule C, non-career SES, or 
Presidential Appointment with Senate confirmation (PAS) employees which 
require DHS and White House approval. This Manual also does not apply to 
Presidential Management Fellows or FEMA’s Presidential Management Fellows 
Program. 

This Manual does not apply to FEMA employees or assignees to FEMA who are 
participating in the Intergovernmental Personnel Act Mobility Program. For more 
information on assignments to or from State or local governments, institutions of 
higher education, or other eligible organizations under the Intergovernmental Act, 
refer to FEMA Directive 252-7, Intergovernmental Personnel Act (IPA), August 4, 
2015. 

This Manual does not apply to rotations, temporary promotions, reassignments, 
“acting” SES positions, “acting” officers, deployments, or instances of accretion of 
duties. 

1-3.  Supersession 

This Manual supersedes FEMA Instruction 3100.3, Interagency Reimbursable 
Details, October 3, 1983. 

1-4.  Authorities/References 

A.  Title 2, United States Code (U.S.C.) § 72a(f), Committee Staffs. 

B.  Title 3, U.S.C. § 112, Details of Employees of Executive Departments. 

C.  Title 3, U.S.C. § 113, Personnel Report. 

D.  Title 5, U.S.C. § 3341, Details within Executive or Military Departments. 

E.  Title 5, U.S.C. § 3343, Details to International Organizations. 

F.  Title 5, U.S.C. § 3345, Acting Officer. 

G.  Title 5, U.S.C. § 3395, Reassignment and Transfer within the Senior 

Executive Service. 

5 

 
 
 
 
H.  Title 22, U.S.C. §§ 2388-2390, Details of Personnel to International 

Organizations. 

I.  Title 31, U.S.C. § 1535, Agency Agreements. 

J.  Section 306 of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency 

Assistance Act, Pub. L. No. 93-288, as amended (Stafford Act), codified at 42 
U.S.C. § 5149(b)(1). 

K.  Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.) Part 300, Subpart C, Details of 

Employees. 

L.  Title 5, C.F.R. Part 317, Subpart I, Employment in the Senior Executive 

Service: Reassignments, Transfers, and Details. 

M.  Title 5, C.F.R. § 330.501, General Restriction on Movement after Competitive 

Appointment. 

N.  Title 5, C.F.R. Part 335, Promotion and Internal Placement. 

O.  Title 5, C.F.R. Part 352, Subpart C, Detail and Transfer of Federal Employees 

to International Organizations. 

P.  21 Comp. Gen., B-211373, Non-Reimbursable Details, March 20, 1985. 

Q.  Office of Personnel Management (OPM), Guide to the Senior Executive 

Service. 

R.  OPM Guide to Processing Personnel Actions. 

S.  Department of Homeland Security Management Directive 0450.1, 

Memoranda of Understanding (MOU) and Memoranda of Agreement (MOA), 
January 24, 2003. 

T.  Department of Homeland Security Management Directive 3130.2, Employee 

Details, March 22, 2004. 

U.  DHS Financial Management Policy Manual (FMPM), Section 3.7 

Intragovernmental Actions, Transactions, and Reporting, January 27, 2015. 

V.  FEMA Instruction 1030.2, Delegations of Authority for Personnel 

Administration, November 9, 1983. 

W. FEMA Manual (FM) 252-2-1, Position Management and Classification, June 

19, 2014. 

X.  FM 252-11-1, Cadre of On-Call Response/Recovery Employee (CORE) 

Program, August 25, 2015. 

Y.  FM 253-11-1, Merit Promotion and Internal Placement, June 23, 2015. 

Z.  FM 255-1-1, Employee Performance Management Program (EPMP), 

February 21, 2013. 

AA.  FM 3100.2, Reduction-in-Force, October 7, 1986. 

BB.  FM 3310.1, Disciplinary and Adverse Actions, September 16, 1981. 

6 

 
CC.  FM 3700.2, Employee Performance System, May 15, 1996. 

1-5.  Policy 

A.  It is FEMA’s policy to: 

1.  Staff positions with the best qualified employees available; 

2.  Develop and use FEMA employees to the maximum extent possible 

consistent with the goals and objectives of FEMA; 

3.  Ensure that all personnel actions are taken without regard to political, 

religious, or labor organization affiliation or non-affiliation, marital or family 
status, race, color, gender, sexual orientation, national origin, disability, 
genetic information, age, or prior Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) 
activity, and without regard to criteria unrelated to the position, such as 
personal friendship or patronage, and that details are based solely on job-
related criteria; 

4.  Ensure applicable provisions of any collective bargaining agreement 

relating to details are followed; and 

5.  Use interagency details to effectively and efficiently fulfill FEMA’s mission 
and essential functions, and to cooperate with other Federal agencies to 
carryout important government functions or programs. 

B.  FEMA will not use details to: 

1.  Circumvent the competitive selection or classification processes; or 

2.  Qualify or prepare employees for promotion; or 

3.  Reassign employees to positions with greater promotion potential. 

1-6.  Definitions 

A.  Deployment. The movement of personnel based on official orders to a 

temporary duty station to fulfill incident management or support requirements, 
including training related to those duties. 

B.  Detail. The temporary assignment of an employee from his or her position of 
record to an established different position or set of unclassified duties for a 
specified period with the employee returning to his or her official position of 
record at the expiration of the detail. An employee who is on a detail is 
considered to be occupying his or her position of record for all purposes. 

C.  Employing Organization. The original FEMA Office or Directorate, DHS 

Headquarters, DHS Component, or other Federal agency from which an 
employee is detailed. 

D.  Gaining Organization. The FEMA Office or Directorate, DHS Headquarters, 
DHS Component, or other Federal agency to which an employee is detailed. 

7 

 
 
 
E.  Inter/Intra-Agency Reimbursable Work Agreement (IRWA). Occurs when one 
Federal agency (the employing organization) provides services or supplies to 
another agency (the gaining organization) without relying on its contracting 
personnel to issue a new contract, task, or delivery order to primarily satisfy 
the gaining organization’s requirements. These transactions include 
reimbursable work performed by Federal employees (other than acquisition 
assistance), employee details, shared services, or interagency activities 
where contracting is incidental to the purpose of the transaction. 

F.  Memorandum of Agreement. A document describing in detail the specific 

responsibilities of, and actions to be taken by, each of the parties so that their 
goals may be accomplished. A MOA may also indicate the goals of the 
parties, to help explain their actions and responsibilities. 

G.  Non-reimbursable Detail. A temporary assignment to another Federal agency 
or other organization where the gaining organization is not responsible for 
reimbursing the employing organization for the employee’s basic pay or 
benefits. The gaining organization may, however, be required to fund the 
employee’s premium pay and/or travel, if agreed upon by the gaining and 
employing organizations. 

H.  Office or Directorate. Offices or Directorates that are at or above Level three 

in FEMA’s organizational structure: Office of the Administrator, Office of Chief 
Counsel, Office of the Chief Financial Officer, Office of External Affairs, Office 
of Policy and Program Analysis, Office of Response and Recovery, Response 
Directorate, Recovery Directorate, Logistics Management Directorate, 
Protection and National Preparedness, National Preparedness Directorate, 
National Continuity Programs Directorate, Grant Program Directorate, Mission 
Support, Office of the Chief Administrative Officer, Office of the Chief 
Component Human Capital Officer, Office of the Chief Information Officer, 
Office of the Chief Procurement Officer, Office of the Chief Security Officer, 
Federal Insurance and Mitigation Administration, Federal Insurance 
Administration (FIA) Mitigation, FIA Insurance, United States Fire 
Administration, and Offices of Regional Administrators. 

I.  Position of Record. An employee’s official position (defined by grade, 

occupational series, employing agency, law enforcement officer status, and 
any other condition that determines coverage under a pay schedule (other 
than official worksite), as documented on the employee’s most recent 
Notification of Personnel Action (Standard Form 50 or equivalent) and current 
position description. A position to which an employee is temporary detailed or 
rotated is not documented as an official position of record. 

J.  Reimbursable Detail. Temporary assignments to another Federal agency or 
other organization where the gaining organization reimburses the employing 
organization for the employee’s basic pay and benefits.  

K.  Rotation. A developmental opportunity in which an employee can build 

proficiency in technical and/or leader competencies associated with their 
position, career path, or level of responsibility. 

8 

 
L.  SES Career Reserved Position. A position which is required to be filled by a 

career appointee in the Senior Executive Service. 

M.  Supervisor of Record. An employee with the delegated authority to assign 
work, discipline, and remove an employee from Federal employment. 

N.  Temporary Promotion. A promotion to a higher graded position on a time 

limited basis. 

O.  Unclassified Duties. A set of duties and responsibilities that have not been 
officially classified and assigned a title, series, and pay level or grade. 

1-7.  Responsibilities 

A.  DHS Office of the Chief Human Capital Officer (OCHCO) is responsible for: 

1.  Developing overall DHS policy and guidance on details consistent with 

applicable Federal laws and regulations; 

2.  Reviewing MOAs for details between FEMA and other Federal agencies 

outside of DHS and international organizations; 

3.  Reviewing requests to detail excepted service employees to competitive 

service positions when those details require OPM approval; 

4.  Reviewing requests to detail an employee within 90 days of the 

employee’s non-temporary competitive appointment which requires OPM 
approval; 

5.  Reviewing requests to detail non-SES employees to an SES position for 

more than 240 days which requires OPM approval; 

6.  Reviewing requests to detail SES employees to GS level positions for 

more than 240 days; 

7.  Concurring on details to: 

i.  Congress, with concurrence from the DHS Office of Legislative Affairs; 

ii.  The White House, with concurrence from the DHS White House 

Liaison Office; 

iii.  Foreign governments, countries, or locations where the detail is 

defined by an interagency agreement and danger pay is authorized, 
with concurrence from the DHS Office of International Affairs; and 

8.  Approving all details of employees to a DHS Headquarters office. 

B.  FEMA Administrator is responsible for: 

1.  Providing overall guidance and oversight of FEMA’s detail program; 

2.  Ensuring details comply with DHS and FEMA policy; 

3.  Approving the detail of a FEMA employee to another Federal agency 

outside of DHS; 

9 

 
 
4.  Approving memoranda justifying non-reimbursable external details; 

5.  Approving requests to detail an employee which requires DHS or OPM 

approval; and 

6.  Approving a non-Stafford Act mission, operational, or training detail for a 

CORE. 

C.  Office of Chief Counsel (OCC) is responsible for: 

1.  Approving memoranda justifying non-reimbursable details; 

2.  Reviewing and approving any non-Stafford Act detail of a CORE prior to 

submitting the request to the Administrator for final approval; and 

3.  Reviewing and approving MOAs for details. 

D.  Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO) is responsible for: 

1.  Drafting and executing interagency agreements for external details that 

require the exchange of funds; 

2.  Certifying the availability of funds if a detail agreement obligates FEMA to 
pay any portion of the salary, benefits, or other expenses for a detailee to 
FEMA; 

3.  Certifying the availability of funds if a detail agreement obligates FEMA to 
pay any additional expenses associated with a FEMA employee’s detail to 
another Federal agency or international organization; and 

4.  Supporting any financial arrangements relating to the implementation of a 

detail agreement. 

E.  Office of External Affairs (OEA) is responsible for reviewing and approving 

details of employees to the Senate or House of Representatives. 

F.  Office of the Chief Component Human Capital Officer (OCCHCO) is 

responsible for: 

1.  Providing policy direction and oversight for FEMA’s detail program; 

2.  Ensuring details are documented in accordance with FEMA policy and 

procedures; 

3.  Ensuring compliance with applicable collective bargaining agreements 

relating to details; 

4.  Providing technical direction to supervisors and managers on the proper 
use of details, the process for creating and approving details, and the 
terms of details to consider prior to executing a detail; 

5.  Reviewing and approving extensions of details; 

6.  Coordinating with Offices and Directorates to advertise and compete 

details as prescribed herein; 

7.  Reviewing and approving any detail request that requires DHS or OPM 

approval; 

10 

 
8.  Reviewing, approving, and submitting any waiver request which requires 

DHS or OPM approval;  

9.  Reviewing and approving details involving SES members; 

10. Approving and monitoring any instance of a non-SES employee detailed 
to an SES position or an SES employee detailed to a non-SES position; 

11. Coordinating with an employee’s supervisor of record to resolve instances 

of poor performance or misconduct; 

12. Approving a CORE detail to a Stafford Act position that is in excess of 120 

days or to a position at a higher pay level; 

13. Reviewing and approving any non-Stafford Act detail of a CORE prior to 

submitting the request to the Administrator for final approval; 

14. Reviewing and approving details of employees between FEMA and DHS 

Headquarters or DHS Components; 

15. Reviewing and approving MOAs for details; 

16. Maintaining and providing records and reports as necessary regarding 

FEMA’s detail program; and 

17. Granting a waiver or exception of any provision in this manual which is 

allowed by law or regulation that does not require DHS or OPM approval. 

G.  Office of the Chief Security Officer (OCSO) is responsible for: 

1.  Ensuring that all detailees who require access to DHS or FEMA 

information systems, routine access to DHS or FEMA facilities, or access 
to sensitive information, undergo a suitability or fitness investigation and 
determination commensurate with the level of risk associated with the job 
function or work being performed during the detail; and 

2.  Authorizing facility access and working with the employing organization on 
the issuance of identification badges for Federal employees detailed to 
FEMA. 

H.  Office or Directorate Heads are responsible for: 

1.  Preparing a statement of work for details to unclassified duties; 

2.  Coordinating with the gaining and employing Office and Directorate on the 

reimbursement of expenses relating to internal FEMA details; 

3.  Negotiating and preparing required MOAs for details; 

4.  Unless delegated, signing Interagency and Intra-agency Agreements; 

5.  Preparing required memoranda justifying non-reimbursable details in 

coordination with OCC; 

6.  Requesting extensions for details; 

7.  Coordinating with OCCHCO and the appropriate HR Specialist to 

advertise and compete a detail as required; 

11 

 
8.  Reviewing and approving details between FEMA and DHS Headquarters, 

DHS Components, or other Federal agencies;  

9.  Ensuring employees on details receive appropriate consideration for 
promotions, and are kept informed of training opportunities; and 

10. Terminating a detail due to performance or misconduct of the detailed 
employee or if the detail conflicts with the operational needs of FEMA. 

I.  Second Level Supervisors are responsible for approving a detail for more 

than 30 days. 

J.  Supervisors of Record are responsible for: 

1.  Making detail selections or approving an employee under his or her direct 

purview for a detail, and following the correct procedures to affect 
temporary or permanent changes in an employee’s position of record, or 
roles and responsibilities, as necessary, in accordance with this Manual 
and FEMA policy; 

2.  Terminating a detail due to performance or misconduct of the detailed 
employee or if the detail conflicts with the operational needs of FEMA; 

3.  Approving, modifying, suspending, or terminating a detailed employee’s 

work or telework schedule as necessary to meet performance or 
operational needs of the detail; 

4.  Establishing and updating performance and development plans for 

employees in accordance with FM 255-1-1 and FM 3700.2; 

5.  Considering the feedback from a detail supervisor when determining an 

employee’s annual appraisal; 

6.  Notifying OCCHCO of any instances of misconduct or poor performance 

by a detailed employee; 

7.  Coordinating with the detail supervisor and OCCHCO to resolve instances 

of poor performance or misconduct; and 

8.  Certifying, in coordination with the detail supervisor, time and attendance 

records and any applicable premium pay requests. 

K.  Detail Supervisors are responsible for: 

1.  Providing day-to-day technical direction of the performance and conduct of 

detailed employees; 

2.  Communicating proper work and performance expectations to detailed 

employees; 

3.  Coordinating with the supervisor of record to approve, modify, or terminate 
an employee’s work or telework schedule as necessary during a detail; 

4.  Providing feedback to the supervisor of record on the employee’s detail 

performance; 

12 

 
5.  Notifying the supervisor of record of any instances of misconduct or poor 

performance by detailees; and 

6.  Referring allegations of misconduct to the employee’s supervisor of 

record. 

L.  HR Liaisons are responsible for ensuring that supervisors of record and 
Offices and Directorates follow the proper procedures for detailing 
employees. 

M.  Timekeepers are responsible for: 

1.  Recording and reporting employee time and attendance in accordance 

with FEMA policy; and 

2.  Maintaining time and attendance records for each FEMA employee, 

including a copy of approved work schedules for employees who are on a 
detail.  

N.  Employees are responsible for: 

1.  Performing assigned duties and responsibilities; 

2.  Complying with FEMA’s performance and conduct standards; 

3.  Completing any required ethics training or financial disclosures to 
participate in a detail prior to the start date of the detail; and 

4.  Adhering to their approved work schedule during a detail, or requesting 

leave. 

1-8.  Forms Prescribed 

A.  Standard Form (SF) 50, Notice of Personnel Action. 

B.  Standard Form (SF) 52, Request for Personnel Action. 

C.  Optional Form (OF) 8, Position Description. 

D.  Office of Government Ethics Form (OGE) 278, Public Financial Disclosure 

Report. 

E.  Office of Government Ethics Form (OGE) 450, Confidential Financial 

Disclosure Report. 

1-9.  Questions 

Questions concerning details should be addressed to the Office of the Chief 
Component Human Capital Officer at (202) 212-3962. 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
2-1.  Purpose of Details 

INTRODUCTION TO DETAILS 

Details may be used to complete emergency or short-term projects; satisfy 
temporary unmet workload requirements; maintain office functions during a 
reorganization, reduction-in-force, or rightsizing; or to accomplish the mission 
requirements of FEMA or other Federal agencies. Supervisors and managers 
must follow the proper policies and procedures to fairly and accurately affect 
personnel actions.  

2-2.  Types of Details 

A.  Internal or External Details. Internal details involve FEMA employees detailed 
to another position within FEMA or to perform unclassified duties within FEMA 
(the policies and procedures for internal details are discussed in Chapter 3). 
External details involve FEMA employees detailed to, or a non-FEMA 
employee detailed from the White House, Congress, DHS Headquarters, 
another DHS Component, other Federal agencies, or international 
organizations (specific policies and procedures applicable for such details are 
discussed in Chapter 5). 

B.  Details to Classified Positions or Unclassified Duties. A detail may be made to 
fill a vacant classified position or complete a set of unclassified duties. If a 
detail is to a classified position, the classified position must be documented 
through a position description. If a detail is to unclassified duties, a statement 
of duties must be prepared by the gaining organization prior to the start date 
of the detail, outlining: 

1.  The duties and responsibilities of the position; 

2.  The purpose of the unclassified duties; and 

3.  The expected duration of the detail. 

C.  Reimbursable or Non-Reimbursable Details. Internal FEMA details will be 
made on a non-reimbursable basis for salary and benefits if the funding 
source does not change. If the detailee’s funding source must be changed for 
an internal FEMA detail, the detail must be made on a reimbursable basis. 
Subject to the exceptions listed below, the employing organization is 
reimbursed by the gaining organization for salaries and expenses that stem 
from a detail. An Office or Directorate that believes that a proposed  detail 
falls into one of the exceptions below must seek a legal opinion from OCC 
prior to executing the detail. 

1.  Absent specific statutory authority, all internal details involving a change in 
funding sources, and external details of FEMA employees to other Federal 
agencies should be on a reimbursable basis, unless the detail: 

14 

 
 
i. 

Involves a matter relating to the employing organization’s 
appropriations and will aid in the purpose for which the appropriations 
were provided; 

ii.  Is legislatively mandated as non-reimbursable;  

iii.  Is documented in a Memorandum of Agreement; or 

iv.  Involves the detail of a CORE to a non-Stafford Act function as 

described in sections 4-2 and 4-3.  

2.  Details to the White House, Congress, or to other Federal agencies 

(including DHS Headquarters and DHS Components) may be made on a 
non-reimbursable basis. If a detail is authorized on a non-reimbursable 
basis, the employing Office or Directorate must prepare a memorandum, 
approved by OCC and, the Administrator or Deputy Administrator, 
justifying the detail. The memorandum must address, at a minimum, the 
following issues: 

i.  How the detail will support or advance FEMA’s mission or operations; 

ii.  How the detail falls into one of the exceptions listed in section 2-2.C.1.; 

iii.  The impact on the Office’s or Directorate’s workload and operations; 

iv.  The impact of the detail on the Office’s or Directorate’s budget; 

v.  How the detail will benefit the employee’s professional or career 

development; 

vi.  How any potential conflicts of interest and ethical issues will be 

addressed; and 

vii. The impact of the detail on similarly situated employees. 

3.  Reimbursable external details must be accompanied by an MOA and an 

Inter/Intra-Agency Reimbursable Work Agreement (IRWA). The applicable 
FEMA Office or Directorate will be responsible for negotiating and 
finalizing an MOA and IRWA with the other agency or component, in 
coordination with  OCFO, OCCHCO, and OCC. For details between 
FEMA and other Federal agencies outside of DHS or international 
organizations, the completed MOA and IRWA must be provided to DHS 
OCHCO. For more information on the requirements for the MOA see 
Section 5-8. 

15 

 
 
 
3-1.  General Provisions 

INTERNAL FEMA DETAILS 

A.  The servicing HR Liaison must be consulted prior to detailing any employee. 

B.  Supervisors should seek input from employees regarding details, but 

employee consent is not required when placing an employee on a detail. 

C.  Supervisors and managers have the discretion to detail an employee. The 

decision to detail an employee should be based on the employing 
organization’s ability to spare the services of the employee without detriment 
to the organization or hiring additional staff. 

D.  The gaining organization shall initiate the request for a detail assignment by 
providing an SF-52 and a position description or statement of work to the 
organization’s servicing HR Liaison (for internal details) or OCCHCO (for 
external details).  

E.  Detailed employees must meet the position sensitivity or risk designation of 

the detail position. 

F.  An employee does not need to meet the minimum qualification requirements 

of the position to which he or she is detailed. An employee does need to meet 
any minimum educational, licensure, or certification requirements of a 
position. 

G.  Employees must have an “Achieved Expectations” or equivalent on their last 
performance review, and not be subject to an ongoing investigation into 
allegations of misconduct to be eligible for a detail. Employees employed for 
more than 90 days without an official performance rating will be considered to 
be at the “Achieved Expectations” or equivalent level. 

H.  An employee may be detailed to a position that is classified at the same, 

lower, or higher grade as the employee’s permanent position of record. If an 
employee is detailed to a higher graded position, FEMA is not required to pay 
the employee at a higher rate of pay. If the Office or Directorate decides to 
pay a detailee at a higher rate, the Office or Directorate must state that the 
selected employee will receive a higher rate of pay before the start of the 
detail, and the action will be processed as a temporary promotion according 
to the Merit Promotion Manual (see FM 253-11-1, Merit Promotion and 
Internal Placement). 

I.  Details may be approved for up to 120 day increments. A detail will 

automatically terminate after a 120 day period unless the gaining organization 
requests and is granted an extension. Requests to extend a detail must be 
made 30 days prior to the end of the detail to OCCHCO and the employee’s 
supervisor of record for review and approval. Upon a written request, 
OCCHCO may grant a waiver of this requirement. 

16 

 
J.  The total duration of all noncompetitive details to higher-graded positions and 
noncompetitive time-limited promotions within the prior 12-month period will 
count toward the 120-day total for time served on a detail. 

K.  Service while on a detail is credited for time-in-grade purposes at the grade of 

the employee’s position of record. 

L.  A detail will not change an employee’s position of record, conditions of 

employment, or benefits. 

M.  OCCHCO will ensure employees on a detail assignment receive notice of 

vacancy announcements and training opportunities. 

N.  Details may be terminated at any time at the request of the employee’s 

supervisor of record or the gaining organization. 

O.  Employees hired under a new Federal competitive service appointment are 

subject to the 90 day restriction on movement after a competitive appointment 
(see 5 C.F.R. § 330.502). As such, they may not be detailed during the first 
90 days of their appointment, without OPM approval. 

3-2.  Ability to Detail an Employee 

A.  FEMA may detail an employee in the competitive service to a position in 

either the competitive or excepted service. 

B.  FEMA may detail an employee in the excepted service to another position in 
the excepted service. If the employee was hired under Schedule A, Schedule 
B, or through a Veterans Recruitment Appointment, FEMA may detail the 
employee to a position in the competitive or excepted service. 

C.  Absent OPM approval after DHS OCHCO review and concurrence, FEMA 
may only detail an employee in the excepted service not hired under 
Schedule A, Schedule B, or through a Veterans Recruitment Appointment to 
another position in the excepted service. 

3-3.  Non-Competitive Details 

A.  Supervisors of record or managers in the employee’s supervisory chain of 
command may approve a detail for up to 30 days. Details in excess of 30 
days must be approved at least by the employee’s second level supervisor. 
Upon written request, OCCHCO may grant a waiver of this requirement. 

B.  An employee may be detailed to a position at the same grade, lower grade, 
higher grade, or to a position with greater promotion potential than the 
employee’s permanent position of record without competition for up to 120 
days in total if the employee has not served an aggregate of 120 days in the 
detail position in the previous 12 months. Any extension beyond 120 days 
must be advertised and competed.   

17 

 
 
 
C.  An employee may be detailed to a position with unclassified duties for up to 
120 days without competition in total. Any extension beyond 120 days must 
be advertised and competed. 

3-4.  Competitive Details 

A.  Details in excess of 120 days or extended beyond the initial 120 day period 

must be advertised and made through competitive procedures. 

B.  The advertisement must state whether the incumbent of the position can be 
non-competitively converted to the position at the end of the detail period. 

3-5.  Competitive Procedures 

When a detail is required to be advertised and competed, the gaining Office or 
Directorate must consult with the appropriate servicing HR Specialist to advertise 
and compete the detail. 

3-6.  SES Details 

A.  Details of SES members may be made for up to 240 days, in no more than 

120 day increments. 

B.  Pursuant to 5 U.S.C. § 3395, details of career SES members cannot be used 
to circumvent the advance notice requirement for reassignments, or the 120 
day moratorium on involuntary reassignments following the appointment of a 
new Administrator or other non-career supervisor. 

C.  FEMA may not detail an SES member to unclassified duties for more than 

120 days. 

D.  Only career SES and non-SES employees may be detailed to an SES career 

reserved position. 

E.  Details of Non-SES Employees to SES Positions and SES Employees to 

Non-SES Positions. 

1.  Details of non-SES employees to SES positions and SES employees to 
non-SES positions should be rare and must be approved by OCCHCO. 

2.  Merit promotion procedures must be used to detail a non-SES employee 
to an SES position for more than 240 days. Competition is not required if 
the non-SES employee is eligible for a noncompetitive SES appointment 
(e.g., a Qualifications Review Board certified graduate of an SES 
Candidate Development Program). 

3.  A non-SES employee detailed to an SES position must complete all ethics 
and financial disclosure statements necessary for the position prior to 
beginning the detail. 

18 

 
 
 
 
4.  The duties and responsibilities of a vacant SES position may be 

temporarily restructured to classify the position as a non-SES position, so 
that a non-SES employee may be detailed to the vacant position. 

F.  FEMA must gain OPM approval, through the DHS CHCO, to: 

1.  Detail a non-SES employee to an SES position that supervises other SES 

positions for more than 240 days; or 

2.  Detail an SES employee to a position at the GS-15 or equivalent level or 

below for more than 240 days. 

3-7.  Supervisory Status 

Employees may be non-competitively detailed to a supervisory position for up to 
120 days. If managers and supervisors detail an employee to a supervisory or 
managerial position for more than 30 days, consideration should be given to all 
eligible, similarly situated employees (i.e., rotate the detail among eligible 
employees) or consider the use of a temporary promotion. Employees detailed to 
such positions will continue to encumber their position of record, and will not 
become the official supervisor of record for any employees who would normally 
report to the position. In such instances, either the employee holding the 
supervisory position as his or her position of record, or the second level 
supervisor, will serve as the supervisor of record. 

3-8.  Work Schedule and Telework 

The mission and operational requirements of a detail may require modification to 
an employee’s current work or telework schedules. The employee’s supervisor of 
record and detail supervisor should coordinate any necessary modifications to an 
employee’s existing work or telework schedule; however, the supervisor of record 
retains the authority to approve, modify, or rescind an employee’s work or 
telework schedule while on a detail. The supervisor of record and the employee’s 
permanent timekeeper will be responsible for certifying and maintaining an 
employee’s time and attendance records during a detail, including approval of 
leave. 

3-9.  Performance Management 

Any employee who is expected to be on detail for more than 90 days will be 
provided an updated performance plan by the employee’s supervisor of record. 
The plan must be adjusted to account for performance goals associated with the 
employee’s position of record, and incorporating performance goals related to the 
detail. Employees who are expected to be on a detail for more than 90 days will 
also be provided with performance feedback and detail supervisor. The 
supervisor of record maintains the responsibility for completing an employee’s 
quarterly and annual appraisals. At the end of a performance cycle the official 
supervisor of record will complete the rating of record, giving consideration to any 
feedback received from the detail supervisor. For details of 90 days or less, the 

19 

 
 
 
 
employee’s performance plan may be updated by the supervisor of record to 
incorporate goals related to the detail, and the supervisor of record may seek 
feedback from the detail supervisor in order to complete the employee’s quarterly 
and annual appraisals. 

3-10.  Discipline and Adverse Actions 

Detail supervisors will document allegations of misconduct or poor performance 
according to FEMA policy and procedures. Detail supervisors must consult with 
the official permanent supervisor of record who shall consult with OCCHCO 
Employee Relations to receive guidance on how to resolve the allegation. The 
supervisor of record will coordinate with OCCHCO/Employee Relations for 
guidance before initiating disciplinary action.  

3-11.  Reduction-in-Force, Transfer of Function, and Rightsizing 

A.  An employee’s position, competitive area, and duty station is determined by 
the employee’s permanent position description and official duty station. 

B.  Positions or duty stations assigned to an employee through a detail do not 

establish an employee’s official position, competitive area, or duty station for 
Reduction-in-Force, Transfer of Function, or Rightsizing actions. 

20 

 
 
 
 
 
4-1.  Details to Perform Stafford Act Activities 

CORE DETAILS 

A.  COREs are hired on a temporary basis under FEMA’s Stafford Act 

appointment authority. The salary and benefits paid to a CORE are funded by 
the DRF, thus the duties and responsibilities of a CORE must predominately 
support Stafford Act activities. COREs may be detailed to a position to 
perform other Stafford Act activities (in rare circumstances, COREs may be 
detailed to perform non-Stafford Act activities, see sections 4-2 and 4-3). 

B.  COREs may be temporarily placed on a detail to carry out a discrete function. 
Absent approval from OPM, a CORE may not be detailed to a competitive 
service position. An Office or Directorate requesting a CORE detail must have 
an available CORE position (see section 2-2 of FM 252-11-1, Cadre of On-
Call Response/Recovery Employee (CORE)). 

C.  A CORE may be placed on a detail for up to 120 days that may be renewed 
for one additional 120 day period. OCCHCO must approve a CORE detailed 
to a position for more than 120 days or to positions at a higher grade for any 
duration. If exceeding 120 days, the detail must be advertised and competed. 
A CORE placed on a detail may not be detailed to a position beyond his or 
her appointment term unless the CORE’s appointment is renewed. 

4-2.  Non-Stafford Act Mission and Operational Details 

The Administrator is vested with the authority to carry out all of FEMA’s statutory 
missions and functions. Upon a determination by the Administrator that urgent 
and compelling circumstances exist in order to carry out FEMA’s mission or to 
support other Federal agency incident operations, a CORE may be placed on a 
detail to perform non-Stafford Act activities under the following conditions: 

A.  The detail shall not exceed 90 days per appointment term; 

B.  The detailed CORE’s salary, benefits, and associated expenses must be paid 
from the account normally charged for carrying out the gaining program or 
activity for the duration of the detail; and 

C.  Training activities and other duties needed to prepare a CORE for a mission 

or operational detail may be conducted outside of the 90 day detail period, but 
must be justified and approved in advance. In such circumstances, the 
training time and the detail time, will be charged to the gaining organization. 

4-3.  Non-Stafford Act Training Details 

With OCCHCO and OCC approval, a CORE may be authorized to complete a 
non-Stafford Act training detail under the following conditions: 

A.  A determination must be made that the training of the CORE, and thus the 

increased ability of that CORE to carry out future Stafford Act activities, is the 
primary purpose and benefit of the non-Stafford Act detail; 

21 

 
 
 
B.  The detail may not exceed 30 days without a determination that a detail of 

more than 30 days is warranted; 

C.  Extensions beyond the initial 30 days must be approved every 30 days 
thereafter and shall not exceed 90 days per appointment term; and 

D.  The detailed CORE’s salary, benefits, and expenses, must be reimbursed by 

the gaining program, office, or agency. 

4-4.  Restrictions on the Use of Non-Stafford Act Details 

COREs performing non-Stafford Act activities must be justified as either an 
urgent and compelling mission or operational detail or a training detail. Under no 
circumstances, may FEMA use both justifications for the same non-Stafford Act 
detail. In both instances, the CORE is limited to one non-Stafford Act detail per 
appointment. 

22 

 
 
 
 
5-1. 

Introduction 

EXTERNAL DETAILS 

The policies and procedures of this Chapter are in addition to, or modify the 
procedures outlined in Chapter 3 when detailing employees to or from 
organizations external to FEMA, including DHS Headquarters and other DHS 
Components. All FEMA employees detailed outside of DHS Headquarters or 
another DHS Component, as well as all non-DHS employees detailed to FEMA, 
are subject to Federal statutory and regulatory provisions governing ethical 
conduct, conflict of interests, suitability, fitness, access to classified information, 
limitations on political activity, and any applicable non-Federal rules or 
restrictions. 

5-2.  White House 

Employees may be placed on a detail to the White House. The employee 
selected for the detail must be approved by OCCHCO, the Administrator, and the 
DHS CHCO. 

5-3.  Congress 

A.  Requests for details to the Senate or the House of Representatives must be 
submitted in writing by the Committee on Rules and Administration of the 
Senate or the Committee on House Oversight of the House of 
Representatives. The detail request must state the purpose of the detail, any 
qualification requirements of the detailed employee, and the length of the 
detail, and whether the detail will be made on a reimbursable or non-
reimbursable basis. 

B.  The employee selected for the detail must be approved by OCCHCO, Office 
of External Affairs/Congressional Affairs Division, the Administrator, and the 
DHS CHCO.  

5-4.  DHS or DHS Components 

A.  DHS employees, including FEMA employees, may be detailed to DHS 

Headquarters or other DHS Components with the mutual agreement of the 
participating DHS office or Component.  

B.  FEMA employees detailed to DHS Headquarters or a DHS Component will 

follow the policies and procedures outlined in Chapters 3 and 4.  

C.  Detailing employees between FEMA and other DHS offices and DHS 

Components may be made on a reimbursable or non-reimbursable basis. If a 
FEMA Office or Directorate details an employee on a non-reimbursable basis, 
a memorandum justifying the detail must be prepared and approved (see 
Section 2-2.C.). For details of employees from DHS Headquarters or a DHS 
Component, OCCHCO and the head of the receiving Office or Directorate 

23 

 
 
 
 
must review and approve the detail. Review and approval by DHS OCHCO is 
not required for details between DHS Components. Prior to the 
commencement of the detail, a MOA must also be prepared and approved 
according to the procedures in Section 5-8, as well as an IRWA if the detail 
involves the exchange of funds. 

5-5.  Other Federal Agencies 

A.  FEMA may detail employees to or accept employees detailed from other 

Federal agencies with the mutual agreement of FEMA and the participating 
agency. 

B.  FEMA employees detailed to a Federal agency will follow the policies and 

procedures outlined in Chapters 3 and 4. 

C.  Details of FEMA employees to other Federal agencies should be made on a 
reimbursable basis. If the detail is not made on a non-reimbursable basis, a 
memorandum justifying the detail must be prepared and approved (see 
Section 2-2.C.). Prior to the commencement of the detail, a MOA must also 
be prepared and approved according to the procedures in Section 5-8, as well 
as an IRWA if the detail involves the exchange of funds. 

D.  For details of FEMA employees to a Federal agency, the employee’s 

supervisor of record, the head of the employee’s Office or Directorate, 
OCCHCO, the Administrator or designee, DHS CHCO, and the responsible 
official within the participating Federal agency must review and approve the 
detail. For details of employees from other Federal agencies to FEMA, the 
head of the gaining Office or Directorate, OCCHCO, and the Administrator or 
designee must review and approve the detail.  

5-6. 

International Organizations 

A.  FEMA may detail an employee to an international organization approved by 

the Department of State upon written request. 

B.  Details to an international organization must be approved by the employee’s 

supervisor of record, the head of the employee’s Office or Directorate, 
OCCHCO, the Administrator, and the DHS CHCO. Details are made for up to 
five years and may be extended for an additional three years. 

5-7. 

Intergovernmental Personnel Act Assignments 

FEMA employees participating in an IPA assignment may be placed in a detail or 
LWOP status during the assignment period. The policies and procedures for 
placing a FEMA employee on an IPA assignment are discussed in FEMA 
Directive 252-7, Intergovernmental Personnel Act (IPA), dated August 4, 2015. 

24 

 
  
 
 
 
5-8.  Memorandums of Agreement 

A.  When a MOA is required to document a detail, the terms of the agreement 

should at least address the following issues: 

1.  The purpose of the detail;  

2.  How the detail will support FEMA’s mission or operations; 

3.  The name, current job title, salary, classification, and address of the 

detailed employee; 

4.  The duties or activities the detailee will perform during the detail period; 

5.  The status of the employee’s permanent position of record; 

6.  The background investigation and badging requirements of the detail; 

7.  The applicability of any conflicts of interest or ethics rules or regulations; 

8.  Whether the detail will be made on a reimbursable or non-reimbursable 
basis. If the detail will be made on a reimbursable basis, which party, in 
whole or in part, will be responsible for funding the detailee’s salary, 
benefits, and other expenses during the detail period.  

9.  If FEMA will cover any contributions to a detailee’s retirement program, life 
insurance, or health benefits, if the detailee chooses to maintain such 
benefits while on a detail to an international organization; 

10. If travel and relocation expenses will be paid to the detailee, and which 
party, in whole or in part, will be responsible for paying such expenses;  

11. The procedures for how and when reimbursements will be made; 

12. The length of the detail;  

13. If the employee will be subject to disaster deployments during the detail 

period; 

14. How the detailee’s performance expectations will be established and 

managed;  

15. How the detailee’s work and telework (if applicable) schedule will be 

established, managed, and documented; 

16. How the detailee’s time and attendance will be monitored and approved 

(including leave requests); 

17. How the detailee will be disciplined if the detailee commits misconduct 

during the detail period and by whom; 

18. The process for extending the detail. Requests to extend a detail must be 

approved and documented prior to the expiration of the detail; 

19. How any disputes regarding the detail will be resolved; 

20. How funding will be arranged for any necessary training, equipment, 

premium pay, or other expenses incurred during the detail; 

25 

 
21. Any foreseeable termination provisions; and 

22. A privacy statement. 

B.  The Office or Directorate seeking to detail an employee to or from another 
Federal agency or international organization shall negotiate and draft the 
MOA with the participating entity. If the detail involves an exchange of funds, 
the Office or Directorate will confer with OCFO to draft and execute an IRWA. 

C.  The MOA must be reviewed and approved by OCCHCO and OCC before the 

MOA is finalized. The MOA must then be approved by the head of the 
participating Office or Directorate; the responsible official from the 
participating entity; and if a FEMA employee will be detailed from FEMA, the 
employee’s supervisor of record. 

D.  If the MOA obligates FEMA to pay for any portion of the costs associated with 
hosting a detailee, including but not limited to, the salary, benefits, expenses, 
or other costs associated with the detailee, OCFO must certify the availability 
of the funds. 

26 

 
 
 
6-1.  Recordkeeping and Reporting 

RECORDKEEPING AND REPORTING 

A.  On a quarterly basis, Offices and Directorates must certify the current status 

of the employees permanently assigned to their offices. Offices and 
Directorates must state whether an employee is performing duties according 
to their official position description, on a detail, or on a rotation. For all 
employees on a detail, the Office or Directorate must state: 

1.  The name, official title, series, grade, organization, and duty station of the 

detailed employee; 

2.  The date of the employee’s appointment; 

3.  The employee’s appointment type (i.e., competitive service, exempted 

service, CORE, or SES); 

4.  The detail title, series, grade, organization, and duty station of the detail; 

5.  Whether the detail is to a higher, lower, or same grade as the employee; 

6.  Whether the detail is to unclassified duties or to a position with a higher 

full performance level than the employee’s permanent position; 

7.  The start date for the detail; 

8.  The number of days of the initial detail period, and the increment of days 

the detail may be extended; 

9.  The number of extensions for the detail;  

10. Whether and how the detail was advertised (if applicable);  

11. Whether the detail was competed;  

12. If there are any similarly situated employees (i.e., other employees who 

were eligible for the detail); and  

13. When the detail is scheduled to end.  

B.  OCCHCO will be responsible for maintaining records of all personnel detailed 

within, to, or from FEMA in accordance with 29 C.F.R. §1602.14. 

C.  All internal details over 30 days will be documented with an SF-52. All details 
over 90 days and all FEMA employees detailed to positions outside of FEMA 
will be documented with an SF-50. 

D.  OCCHCO will provide all necessary documentation or reports regarding 
FEMA’s detail program as requested by DHS, OPM, or other authorized 
agencies. 

27 

 
 
FEMA MANUAL 123-9-1 
TELEWORK  
APPROVAL DATE: 1/9/2013 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 

Federal Emergency Management Agency 

OFFICE OF THE CHIEF HUMAN CAPITAL OFFICER 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Foreword 

This Manual provides guidance and policy direction for the administration, implementation, and 
oversight of the Federal Emergency Management Agency's (FEMA) Telework Program. FEMA 
considers telecommuting to be a viable alternative work arrangement in cases where individual, job, 
and supervisor characteristics are best suited to such an arrangement. Teleworking allows an 
employee to work at home or other approved alternative work locations during regular working 
hours. Teleworking is a voluntary work alternative that may be appropriate for some employees and 
some jobs. It is not an entitlement and in no way changes the terms and conditions of employment with 
the Agency. 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 

Foreword .........................................................................................................................................................2 

CHAPTER 1: GENERAL INFORMATION ..................................................................................................... 4 
1-1. Purpose .........................................................................................................................................4 

1-2. Applicability and Scope ..................................................................................................................4 

1-3. Supersession .................................................................................................................................4 

1-4. Authorities/ References ..................................................................................................................4 

1-5. Policy ............................................................................................................................................. 5 

1-6. Definitions ..................................................................................................................  7 

1 - 7.    Responsibilities  ..........................................................................................................................  10 

1-8. Reporting Requirement ........................................................................................................... 14 

1-9. Forms Prescribed ..........................................................................................................  14 

1-10. Questions ..................................................................................................................................  14 

CHAPTER 2: PROCEDURES ..................................................................................................................... 15 

2-1. Telework Arrangements ..................................................................................................... 15 

2-2. Determining Eligibility ....................................................................................................  16 

2-3. Training ............................................................................................................  17 

2-4. Appeals ........................................................................................................................................ 17 

CHAPTER 3: TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF THE TELEWORK PROGRAM .................................... 18 

3-1. Changes to Telework Agreement ............................................................................................ 18 

3-2. Residential Telework Environment .......................................................................................... 18 

3-3. Official Duty Station ................................................................................................................ 18 

3-4. Time and Attendance, Work and Performance and Overtime ..................................................... 19 

3-5. Reimbursable Expenses ......................................................................................................... 19 

3-6. Security, Supplies and Equipment ...........................................................................................20 

3-7. Worker’s Compensation and other Liabilities ......................................................................  21 

3-8. Standards of Conduct ............................................................................................................. 21 

3-9. Emergency Situations ............................................................................................................. 21 

3-10. Telework and COOP Planning .............................................................................................. 22 

3 

 
 
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL INFORMATION 

1-1. Purpose 

The purpose of telework is to complete the duties, responsibilities, and other authorized activities 
(such as online training) of an employee’s official position from an alternative worksite, other than 
at the location an employee normally works.  The availability of telework promotes recruitment 
and retention; helps employees manage commutes and other work/life issues; reduces traffic 
congestion, fuel consumption and vehicle emissions; reduces real estate costs; and ensures 
continuity of essential governmental functions in the event of an emergency.  This Manual 
prescribes policy and assigns responsibility for telework. It details position and employee 
eligibility determinations for teleworking. It also addresses performance management of the 
teleworker and provides guidance on security considerations for teleworking. 

1-2. Applicability and Scope 

This Manual applies to all FEMA employees as defined in Title 5 Section 2105 of the United 
States Code, except those excluded from coverage under Pub. L. No. 111-292, Section 6502, 
and those employees deemed ineligible by the Agency to participate in the telework 
program. 

1-3. Supersession  

This Telework policy supersedes FEMA Manual 3000.3, Program Guidance for FEMA 
Telework Program, dated July 31, 2000. 

1-4. Authorities/ References 

A.  P.L. 111-292, “Telework Enhancement Act of 2010,” December 9, 2010. 
B.  P.L. 106-346, “Making appropriations for the Department of Transportation and related 
agencies for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2001, and for other purposes,” 
Section 359 and accompanying conference report. 

C.  P.L. 105-277, “Making omnibus consolidated and emergency appropriations for the fiscal 
year  ending  September  30,  1999,  and  for  other  purposes,”  Title  IV,  “Domestic  Food 
Programs,” Section 630, “Flexiplace Work Telecommuting Programs.” 

D.  P.L. 104-52, “Making appropriations for the Treasury Department, the United States 
Postal Service, the Executive Office of the President, and certain Independent 
Agencies, for the fiscal year ending September 30, 1996, and for other purposes,” 
Section 620. 

E.  U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) Guide to Telework in the Federal 

Government. 

F.  U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) Washington, DC, Area Dismissal and  

Closure Procedures. 

G.  U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) Pandemic Information. 
H.  FMR Bulletin 2006-B3: Guidelines for Alternative Workplace Arrangements, March 17, 

2006. 

I.  FMR Bulletin 2007-B1: Information Technology and Telecommunications Guidelines for 

Federal Telework and Other Alternative Workplace Arrangement Program, March 2, 2007. 

J.  Office of Management and Budget Memorandum, “Protection of Sensitive Agency 

Information,” June 24, 2006. 

K.  DHS Continuity of Operations Programs and Continuity of Government Programs, MD 

9300.1. 

L.  Federal Employees’ Compensation Act (FECA), 5 U.S.C., Chapter 8. 
M.  The Privacy Act of 1974, 5 U.S.C. § 552a. 

4 

 
 
N.  Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 531.605, Determining an Employee's Official 

Worksite. 

O.  Office of Management and Budget Memorandum, “Implementing Telework 

Enhancement Act of 2010 IT Purchasing Requirements”. 

P.  EEOC Enforcement Guidance, “Reasonable Accommodation and Undue Hardship 
Under the Americans with Disabilities Act,” No. 915.002 (October 17, 2002). 

Q.  EEOC Work at Home/Telework as a Reasonable Accommodation, 

http://www.eeoc.gov.facts/telework.html (Oct. 27, 2005). 

R.  DHS MD 250-05 and DHS MD 250-05-001, “Designation of Essential and Exempt 

Personnel”. 

1-5. Policy 

A.  FEMA promotes telework (also known as flexiplace, telecommuting, or work-from-home) as 
a workplace flexibility for recruiting top talent; retaining current employees; reducing the 
cost of office space, absenteeism, and use of workers compensation; and to ensure 
continuity of essential governmental functions in the event of an emergency. 

B.  The FEMA telework program embraces the premise that all positions are presumed 
suitable for telework, unless the official duties require, on a daily basis, an employee to be 
physically present at a worksite because the employee’s duties cannot be performed 
remotely or from an alternate worksite, or that the employee’s duties require the frequent 
and direct handling of sensitive materials inappropriate for telework. 

C.  All eligible employees will be afforded every opportunity to participate in the telework 
program. Employees in occupations typically deemed ineligible for telework who are 
working on rotations or temporary details that include work that is eligible for telework may 
participate in the telework program. See criteria in Section 2-2, Determining Eligibility, for 
further discussion of eligibility requirements. 

D.  Employees participating in the telework program will be provided with the necessary 

government equipment and supplies to adequately perform their tasks at an alternate 
worksite as detailed in Section 3-6, Security and Equipment. 

E.  Telework may be executed either 1) on a regular and recurring basis, meaning that the 
employee teleworks at least one day or more a pay period or 2) on a situational or 
episodic basis, that occurs on an occasional, non-routine circumstance and/or during 
COOP/pandemic health crisis, individual employee medical reasons, or other emergency 
situations. 

F.  Telework for more than one day a pay period may be appropriate for attracting potential 
applicants, retaining current employees, and providing reasonable accommodations for 
employees in accordance with guidance by Office of Equal Rights (OER), as well as for 
accommodating employees housed in Federal buildings undergoing renovation projects 
and for addressing other agency or employee needs. 

G.  Unscheduled situational telework is an important component of FEMA’s ability to operate in 

emergencies. Telework should be incorporated into emergency preparedness operations to 
the broadest extent possible. Unscheduled telework is a way for FEMA and its employees 

5 

 
 
to maintain productivity and help ensure safety of the Federal workforce and the public. For 
example, telework will be considered for situational inclement weather as well as 
emergency situations that involve national security, extended emergencies, or other unique 
situations (See Section 3-9 Emergency Situations). 

H.  As part of FEMA Continuity of Operations Plan (COOP), positions may be designated as 

Mission Critical. These designations should be an integral part of the COOP planning and 
emergency occupant plans. As such, each organization should test its preparedness at 
least annually for an all-staff telework emergency by conducting an exercise where all 
eligible employees telework for at least one day (See Section 3-10).  Designation as Mission 
Critical means the employee in the position is deemed an Emergency Employee for 
purposes of Para. 1-6.H.  

I.  Telework will be considered when planning for any building renovation in any agency 

location, especially where workspace sharing (e.g., hoteling) is required. 

J.  An approved and up-to-date agreement is required for any teleworking arrangement. The 
agreement should outline emergency designations when applicable and allow easy 
implementation for unscheduled telework in emergency or unforeseen situations where 
teleworking may be appropriate. 

K.  Telework training is required for all new teleworkers and their managers before he/she 
begins a telework arrangement.  Employees with telework agreements may also be 
required to undergo periodic retraining.  

L.  Agencies/staff offices must include an appropriate notice in all eligible vacancy 

announcements when the position is eligible for telework. For example, "The duties of this 
position can be performed while teleworking” or “This position is eligible for telework and 
other flexible work arrangements.” 

M.  Telework may be considered appropriate as an accommodation for employees who meet 

reasonable accommodation guidelines in alignment with the Office of Equal Rights (OER). 

N.  If an employee teleworks full time, supervisors must coordinate with Office of Chief 

Component Human Capital Officer (OCCHCO)  to ensure the employee is aware of any 
impact to pay or benefits that may result from the arrangement (See Section 3-3, Official 
Duty Station). 

O.  Employee performance for teleworkers and non-teleworkers will be evaluated using the 
same performance management program and standards that cover workers at traditional 
office/duty locations. This includes providing all employees the same opportunities and 
treatment with regards to work assignments, periodic appraisal of job performance, awards, 
recognition, training and developmental opportunities, promotions, and retention incentives. 

P.  Teleworking  employees  are  subject  to  ensuring  that  records  subject  to  Privacy  Act  and 
sensitive  or  classified  data  are  not  disclosed  to  anyone  except  those  who  are  authorized 
access  to  such  information  in  order  to  perform  their  duties.  Individuals  may  not  remove 
classified data from employees’ official work sites to alternate worksite locations. 

Q.  Teleworking employees continue to be bound by DHS and FEMA standards of conduct and 

performance directives and policies while working at the alternate worksite. 

6 

 
 
R.  Employees rights provided for in the collective bargaining agreement are not affected by 

participation in the telework program. 

S.  Employees can both telework and participate in an Alternate Work Schedule (AWS). 

However, a program office can restrict the combination of the usage of both programs 
by an employee if it negatively impacts  mission accomplishment. 

1-6.  Definitions 

A.  Alternative Work Schedules (AWS):  Work schedules that differ from traditional fixed work 
schedules (e.g., 8 hours per day, 40 hours per week).  There are two categories of AWS:  
Flexible Work Schedules (FWS) or Compressed Work Schedules (CWS). 

B.  Alternate Worksite/Location (AWL): A location where official duties are performed away 
from the traditional worksite. An alternate worksite may be the employee's residence, a 
satellite office, or another approved location. For an employee covered by a telework 
agreement, the alternate worksite may be the employee’s official worksite. 

C.  Compressed Work Schedule (CWS):  A schedule in which the biweekly 80-hour 

requirement for a full-time employee is fulfilled in less than 10 workdays. For a part-time 
employee, the biweekly requirement of LESS than 80 hours is completed in less than 10 
workdays. 

D.  Continuity Facility: Locations other than the primary facility used to carry out essential 
functions during continuity of operations events. In some cases, an employee’s home or 
other virtual office options may be designated as a continuity facility if determined to have 
an acceptable risk level for the execution of essential functions continue. 

E.  Continuity of Operations Plan (COOP): A plan containing procedures designed to ensure 

continuity of essential functions at FEMA under all emergency circumstances. Some of the 
major purposes of a COOP Plan include delineating essential Agency functions, 
specifying the order of succession of Agency leaders and delegations of authority, and 
providing for safekeeping of vital records/databases. Under a COOP, employees with 
and without Telework Agreements may be required to work at an alternate worksite. 
F.  Emergency: Includes national and local security situations, extended emergencies, or other 
unique situations when the Agency is closed or access to an employee’s official duty station 
or other agency facilities is limited. 

G.  Emergency Employees:  Employees who are assigned to positions required to sustain a 

facility or function in the event of a localized situation, such as inclement weather, 
interruption of power, or a dismissal or closure of DHS operations or services.  These 
employees are expected to work even when DHS applies dismissal or closure 
procedures.  The designation of Emergency Employees may vary according to the 
particular nature of an exigency.  Emergency Employees may also be designated 
Mission Critical in Agency COOP plans.  See Para. 1-5.H.  FEMA employees have 
regular and recurring emergency management responsibilities; though not every position 
requires routine deployment to disaster sites, all positions may be subject to recall based 
on mission needs. 

H.  Emergency Relocation Group (ERG): Staff assigned responsibility to continue essential 

7 

 
 
functions from an alternate site in the event that their primary operating facilities are 
threatened or have been incapacitated by an incident. 

I.  Executive Level Managers: Associate Administrators, Regional Administrators, Assistant 

Administrators, and Program Directors and other Office Chiefs. 

J.  FEMA Telework Managing Officer: The senior FEMA employee who serves as the Agency’s 

point of contact to provide overall strategic direction on telework issues. 

K.  FEMA Telework Program Manager: The Program Manager serves as the Agency point of 
contact (POC) for Program Office/Regional Telework Coordinators, for senior managers, 
and for external organizations (e.g., the U.S. Office of Personnel Management, the General 
Services Administration, and the Department of Homeland Security). He/she provides 
leadership, guidance and interpretation, data analysis, training, and evaluation of the 
Agency’s telework program and policy.  

L.  Flexible Work Schedule (FWS):  A schedule in which an employee selects arrival and 

departure times that are outside business hours of, the FEMA activity to which assigned 
but within the flexible time band, and includes 8 hours of duty and a 30-minute lunch 
period each day. 

M.  Mission Essential Functions (MEFs): The limited set of department and agency level 
government functions that must be continued throughout, or resumed rapidly after, a 
disruption of normal activities. 

N.  Primary Mission Essential Functions (PMEFs): Those department and agency Mission 

Essential Functions, validated by the NCC, which must be performed in order to support the 
performance of MEFs before, during, and in the aftermath of an emergency. PMEFs need to 
be continuous or resumed within 12 hours after an event and maintained for up to 30 days 
or until normal operations can be resumed. 

O.  Official Discipline (Formal): An action pertaining to the reprimand, suspension, or removal 
of an employee which is documented and is present in an employee’s electronic Official 
Personnel File (eOPF).  

P.  Official Duty Station: The official worksite is the location of an employee’s position of 
record where the employee regularly performs his/her duties. Certain location-based pay 
entitlements (such as locality payments, special rate supplements, and non-foreign area 
cost-of-living allowances) are based on the location of the employee's official worksite 
associated with the employee's position of record (See Section 3-3, Official Duty Station).  
If the employee's work involves recurring travel or the employee's work location varies on 
a recurring basis (sometimes referred to as “mobile work”), the official worksite is the 
location where the work activities of the employee's position of record are based, as 
determined by the employing agency, subject to the requirement that the official worksite 
must be in a locality pay area in which the employee regularly performs work.  Examples 
of mobile work include site audits, site inspections, investigations, property management, 
and work performed while commuting, traveling between worksites, or on Temporary Duty 
(TDY). 

Q.  Official Home of Record: The employee’s residential address that is officially listed in the 

employee’s Official Personnel Folder (OPF). 

8 

 
 
R.  Personal Identifiable Information (PII): Any information about an individual maintained in 
an agency system of records, including, but not limited to, financial transactions, medical 
history, criminal history, employment history, or any other information which can be 
retrieved using a personal identifier, such as name, Social Security Number, date and 
place of birth, mother’s maiden name, biometric records, and any other personal 
information which is linked or linkable to an individual. 

S.  Portable Work: Work normally performed at an employee’s official worksite that can be 
performed with equal effectiveness at an Alternative Work Location with respect to quality, 
quantity, timeliness, efficiency, customer service, and other aspects of the Agency’s 
mission accomplishment.  This work is part of the employee’s regular assignments and 
does not involve a change in duties or in the way assignments are performed. 

O.  Program Office/Regional Telework Coordinators: FEMA employees who, as part of their 
official duties, serve as points of contact for providing guidance to employees and 
managers in their respective organizations, collect telework data for reports, and oversee 
implementation of the Agency’s Telework Program in their organizations.  In addition, 
they will ensure compliance of the Telework Program with appropriate DHS directives, 
FEMA policies, processes, and procedures, and to identify and implement Telework 
improvements or corrective actions. They work collaboratively with the Agency’s 
Telework Coordinator. 

P.  Re-certification of Telework Agreements: Annual review of an employee’s Telework 

Agreement by the employee’s supervisor to determine the employee’s current eligibility for 
participating in the Telework Program. The employee’s participation in the Telework 
Program may be amended or disapproved (terminated); otherwise agreements remain in 
force. Supervisors must document any amendment in writing by completing a new  
FEMA Form 123-9-0-1, Telework Application and Agreement with the employee.  

Q.  Regular Telework (Core): Work that is performed on an established work schedule at an 
approved AWL on a regular, recurring, and ongoing basis. Telework arrangements may be 
determined by the Supervisor to be full-time or part-time based on eligible telework duties 
and portable work needs (full-time arrangements must consider Section 3-3, Official Duty 
Station). Employees with Regular Telework agreements may also apply for Situational 
Telework in order to work on specific projects and/or in response to an emergency. 

R.  Situational Telework (Episodic): Telework that occurs on an occasional, non-routine basis 
and/or during COOP/pandemic health crisis or other emergency situations. Supervisors 
have discretion to establish timeframes for Situational Telework (Episodic) based on 
work-related factors such as work priority, deadlines, etc. When making an approval for a 
situational telework agreement for a medical reason, special project, or accommodation 
request, the agreement must be reviewed and reapproved every 30 days. Telework 
arrangements may be determined by the Supervisor to be full-time or part-time based on 
eligible telework duties and portable work needs (full-time arrangements must consider 
Section 3-3, Official Duty Station). The definition of situational telework includes 
“unscheduled telework” as defined separately. Situational telework may be used: 

9 

 
 
1.  To allow an employee to perform work on a specific organizational project or a 

discrete portion of a project; 

2.  To permit an employee to perform work at an AWL during inclement weather; 

3.  To allow an employee to perform work when his/her official worksite is not accessible 
(e.g., building damage/emergency, or because of traffic disruption due to street closures, 
conventions, demonstrations, etc.); 

4.  To enable an employee to perform work at an AWL during an agency closure or early 

dismissal (see Section 3-9, Emergency Situations for further detail); or 

5.  For an employee who is recovering from illness or an injury and is temporarily unable to 

physically report to the traditional office, as supported by documentation from the 
employee’s physician. 

S.  Telework:  A  flexible  work  arrangement  under  which  employees  perform  the  duties  and 
responsibilities of their positions from an approved worksite other than the location from 
which the employee would otherwise work. 

T.  Telework Application and Agreement: A written agreement of the terms and conditions of 
the telework arrangement that is completed and signed by the participating employee and 
the supervisor or designee(s).  

U.  Telework-Ready Employee: An employee who meets the eligibility criteria of the 

Telework Program, has completed the required training, has the appropriate space and 
equipment and work assignments needed to work at a location other than the official 
worksite, and has an approved Telework Agreement. 

V.  Tour of Duty: The hours of a day (a daily tour of duty) and the days of an administrative 
workweek (a weekly tour of duty) that constitute an employee's regularly scheduled 
administrative workweek. 

W. Traditional Worksite: The location (i.e., workplace) where an employee would usually 

report for work absent a telework agreement. 

X.  Unscheduled Telework: A term applied in the context of OPM’s Washington, DC, Area 
Dismissal and Closure Procedures, in reference to telework that occurs on day(s) that a 
telework approved employee was not scheduled in advance to telework.  This is 
considered a type of situational telework and applies to all FEMA locations. 

Y.  Workspace Sharing (Hoteling): An arrangement involving two or more employees 
sharing one office/cubicle by coordinating the days each employee is on-site at the 
traditional worksite; or a shared use of non-dedicated workstations by employees (who 
telework the majority of their time) when they are on-site at the traditional worksite. 

1-  7  Responsibilities 

A. Chief Component Human Capital Officer (CCHCO) is responsible for: 

1.  Designating an Agency Telework Managing Officer to administer and oversee the 

telework program for FEMA; and 

2.  Developing Agency specific guidelines on telework necessary to implement DHS policy. 

10 

 
 
 
  
 
B. Executive-Level Managers are responsible for: 

1.  Actively promoting telework within their respective organizations, consistent with 
accomplishing their assigned missions, making every effort to overcome artificial 
barriers to program implementation and integrating telework into continuity of operations 
(COOP) activities;  

2.  Serving as the final deciding authority regarding whether an employee will be allowed to 

telework if a supervisor’s disapproval is appealed by an employee; and 

3.  Determining which employees are Emergency Employees, in coordination with the 

FEMA Telework Program Manager. 

C. Office of Equal Rights (OER) is responsible for: 

1. Providing technical resource information on reasonable accommodation; and 
2. Advising on usage of telework as an accommodation. 

D. Chief Information Officer in coordination with Chief Acquisition Officer is responsible for: 
1.  Procuring allowable Information Technology products and services, to include remote 

access servers, client devices, and internal resources accessible through remote 
access; 

2.  Deploying and modernizing IT systems and infrastructure to support agency 

telework requirements (as applicable to Section 3-6, Security and Equipment); 
and 

3.  Ensuring compliance of devices and infrastructure with federal security and privacy 

requirements. 

E. FEMA Telework Managing Officer is responsible for: 

1.  Developing and evaluating program structure and resources; 
2.  Providing overall strategic program direction; and 
3.  Leveraging support for the telework program throughout the agency by collaborating 

with senior agency officials. 

F. FEMA Telework Program Manager is responsible for: 

1.  Providing overall direction on the implementation of the FEMA telework program in 
accordance with law, this Instruction, and other applicable DHS policies; and program 
implementation, and operation of the telework program in accordance with law, this 
Instruction, and other applicable DHS policies; 

2.  Ensuring oversight for the Agency Telework program, monitoring, evaluating and 

providing guidance and training to all Telework Coordinators; 

3.  Actively promoting telework within the Agency, consistent with accomplishing assigned 

missions, and making every effort to overcome artificial barriers to program 
implementation through education and training for leadership and supervisors on 
telework benefits, performance management in a telework environment, and the 
value of integrating telework into COOP activities; and 

4.  Tracking employee participation and providing usage data at the end of each calendar 

year for submission to the DHS Chief Human Capital Officer or the U.S. Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) for Annual Telework Reporting. Additionally a copy will 
be provided to the FEMA Labor Management Partnership Council. 

G. Telework Coordinators are responsible for: 

1.  Reviewing all submitted Telework forms, agreements, and documents received for 

completeness and compliance; 

11 

 
 
 
2.  Interpreting Telework policy application to regional, directorate, or division level; 
3.  Maintaining accurate records of program participation at regional, directorate, or division 

level; 

4.  Working with the Telework Program Manager to complete and submit regional, 

directorate, or division program reporting requirements; and 

5.  Ensuring employees are fully trained on telework procedures including IT and data 

security and safety requirements. 

H. The FEMA Privacy Office is responsible for providing policy guidance and training for 
employees and managers to ensure that the use of AWL includes  proper handling of 
information protected by the Privacy Act; 

I.  The FEMA Office of the Chief Security Officer is responsible for providing policy guidance 
and training for employees and managers to ensure that the use of AWL does not risk the 
improper disclosure of sensitive but unclassified (For Official Use Only (FOUO)),  or 
classified information; 

J.  FEMA Supervisors are responsible for: 

1.  Ensuring there is adequate coverage during public business hours to enable operations 

to continue to be carried out in an efficient and economical manner and that 
participating and nonparticipating employees are treated equitably; 

2.  Making the determination regarding whether requesting employees are eligible for 

telework; 

3.  Determining whether employees’ duties include sufficient portable work to permit 

regular telework for a given number of days per pay period; 

4.  In collaboration with OCCHCO, ensure that, as appropriate, position descriptions 

are updated to reflect which positions are not suitable for telework and the 
reasons for such determinations; 

5.  Approving or disapproving requests for telework (When making an approval for a 

situational telework agreement for a medical reason, special project, or accommodation 
request, the agreement must be reviewed and reapproved every 30 days. A request for 
approval for an employee to telework outside of their normal commuting area or in 
another geographical area should be handled as a request for change of duty location 
and not a telework request.); 

6.  Justifying, in writing, the basis for the disapproval or termination of telework in the 
comments portion of the telework request; and communicating clearly to their 
employees the reasons for the disapproval of employees’ telework requests; 
7.  Monitoring and reviewing  all telework arrangements annually to make sure mission 

requirements are being met; 

8.  Monitoring employee performance and terminating telework arrangements if an 
employee’s performance does not meet or exceed the  “proficient,” or “achieved 
expectations” standard, or if the teleworking arrangement fails to meet organizational 
needs; 

9.  Ensuring proper accountability of government equipment assigned to teleworkers; 
10. In the event of lost or stolen equipment, conducting an inquiry into the facts and 

circumstances, and reporting findings in accordance with FEMA’s Personal Property 
Manual 119-7-1, specifically FEMA Form 119-7-1-1, Report of Survey;  

11. Ensuring that employees comply with laws, policies, and directives to prevent the 
unauthorized disclosure of information that is confidential, sensitive, classified, or 
PII; 

12 

 
 
 
 
12. Contacting the Office of Equal Rights for additional guidance before approving an 

episodic and situational or regular and recurring telework agreement in cases where 
an employee requests telework as an accommodation for disability; and 
13. Engaging and involving Agency Labor Representatives, where applicable, in 
determining the types of positions and tasks eligible for telework. Engaging and 
involving Equal Rights representatives where exclusive representation is not 
applicable in determining the types of positions and tasks eligible for telework. 

K. FEMA Employees are responsible for: 

1.  Completing and signing a telework agreement detailing the location and requirements 
of the alternate worksite. (If requesting telework at home, designate one area in the 
home as the official work station for purposes of telework on the Telework Agreement 
(e.g., First Floor Office) and complete the attached self–certification safety checklist); 
2.  Maintaining a level of performance that is at the proficient or “achieved expectations” 

level or higher; 

3.  Protecting all government-provided equipment and software from loss, theft, or damage 

(including environmental damage); 

4.  Ensuring the security of all official, sensitive, and, in particular, for official use only 
(FOUO) data, and strictly adhering to Agency information and electronic security 
policies; 

5.  Agreeing to protect government records from unauthorized disclosure or damage and to 
comply with the requirements of all information security laws, rules, and regulations, 
including the Privacy Act of 1974; 

6.  Immediately notifying his or her supervisor and all appropriate Agency officials, 

including the Privacy Officer, when a loss, theft, or compromise of personal information 
or government equipment occurs; 

7.  Working at the traditional worksite on telework days if necessitated by work 

requirements, or as directed; 

8.  Updating his or her application for Transit Subsidy benefits within 10 

working days of the approval of a regular telework agreement; 

9.  Ensuring the designated area in his or her home complies with safety requirements for 

work-at-home telework; 

10. Notifying their supervisor immediately of any accident or injury at the alternate worksite 

and completing the required documentation; 

11. Notifying their supervisor if equipment failure or other technical reasons affect their 

ability to telework efficiently;  

12. Forwarding office telephones to the agency issued equipment; (this requirement will be 
dependent upon the phone system at the employee’s traditional worksite, as all systems 
do not have the call forwarding feature);  

13. Adhering to the established work schedule and properly accounting for and reporting 

actual hours worked; and 

14. Adhering to the same workday requirements when performing work at the AWL as 

they would be if they were performing work at the official duty station. 

1-8. Reporting Requirement  

OCCHCO will collect the appropriate information and report to DHS Chief Human Capital 
Officer and OPM as directed. 

1-9. Forms Prescribed  

A. 

FEMA Form 123-9-0-1, Telework Application and Agreement Form 

13 

 
 
 
B. 

FEMA Form 123-9-0-2, Employee Self-Certification Safety and Health Checklist 

1-10. Questions  

Questions concerning Telework should be addressed to the Office of Chief Component 
Human Capital Officer at (202) 646-3962. 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 2: PROCEDURES 

2-1. Telework Arrangements 

A. While participation in telework is not an employee entitlement, FEMA assumes that all 

positions are eligible for telework unless the supervisor can document otherwise that official 
duties are not suitable for work in a remote or alternate worksite.  An employee may 
participate in the program if the employee meets eligibility requirements as outlined in Section 
2-2, Determining Eligibility. 

B.  A complete telework documentation package must be submitted to the Telework 

Coordinator prior to the participation of an employee in the telework program including: 
1.  A completed and signed FEMA Telework Program Application and Agreement 

Form, which has been prepared in accordance with this policy and attests to the validity 
of eligibility and program participation.  This is required to document any form of telework 
arrangement and prior to the beginning of telework.  Telework plan should be attached; 

2.  The FEMA Telework Health and Safety Checklist must be completed and signed; 
3.  Documentation of completed telework training program as described in Section 2-3, 

Training; and 

4.  Completion of any documentation related to applicable telework equipment. 
C.  A telework arrangement does not alter the terms and conditions of the appointment as 
specified on the employee's Notification of Personnel Action, SF-50. However, an 
employee's official duty station may change if he or she does not regularly commute into 
the agency office (See Section 3-3, Official Duty Station). The telework arrangement must not 
affect other conditions of employment (e.g., hours of work) unless otherwise specified in the 
telework agreement. Employees may be approved both to telework and to work an alternative 
work schedule. 

D. The telework arrangement may normally be terminated in writing by either management or 

by the employee with reasonable advance notice, generally fourteen calendar days, but not 
less than seven calendar days.  Reasons for termination of an arrangement may be a 
decline in performance or productivity, or if the arrangement no longer benefits the 
organization's needs.  Program Offices may establish specific termination provisions, as they 
deem necessary, for their operations and mission needs.  When an arrangement is 
terminated by management, the supervisor must provide the employee with a brief, written 
explanation as to why.    

E.  The  telework  agreement  shall  be  for  the  performance  of  official  duties  or  related  activities 
(professional  development,  training)  and  shall  not  be  treated  as  an  opportunity  to  conduct 
personal business. 

F.  Teleworkers are responsible for ensuring appropriate arrangements for the care of 

dependents at home if the home is their official telework duty location. That is, employees may 
not use telework to personally care for a dependent. However, this does not preclude a 
teleworker from having a caregiver working in the home providing care to the 
dependent(s) while he/she teleworks. 

G.  Management reserves the right, normally with one day notice, to require employees to 
return to the official duty location on scheduled telework days, based on operational 
requirements.  Exceptions for a lesser notification may be appropriate in certain unforeseen 
situations. 

H.  Approved telework agreements should be coordinated with the Agency Transit Subsidy 

Manager. Notify the Agency Transit Subsidy Manager of the number of days the employee 
will telework so the transit subsidy coordinator can determine if the employee’s subsidy 
should be reduced appropriately. 

15 

 
 
I.  Employees who telework must be available to their coworkers, supervisor, and customers 
in the same manner as if they were in their duty location. For example, phone calls and 
emails must be answered in the same timeframe as if the employee were working in their 
duty location. This means that phones may normally be forwarded to agency issued 
equipment. It may also mean that the employee should provide a secondary phone number 
to be reached at the telework site if possible. Specific communication expectations shall be 
addressed in the telework agreement, if necessary. 

J.  During emergency situations, such as closures of the employee’s official duty station, or 
during heightened periods of disaster work activity,, the agency may require employees 
with telework agreements to telework on short notice.  See Paragraph 3-9. 

2-2. Determining Eligibility 

A.  Positions eligible for telework are those involving tasks (may be one or more) and work 
activities that are portable, do not depend on the employee being at the official duty 
location worksite, are measureable, and are conducive to supervisory oversight at the 
alternate worksite. Job series and title do not determine eligibility as supervisors and 
managers are required to encourage all eligible employees the opportunity to Telework. 
B.  Tasks and work activities generally suited for telework include, but are not limited to: 

reading, reviewing, editing, scheduling, planning, writing, and policy development; research; 
analysis (e.g., investigating, program analysis, policy analysis, and financial analysis); 
report writing; telephone-intensive tasks (excluding receptionist duties); computer-oriented 
tasks (e.g., required or developmental training, programming, data entry, word processing, 
web page design) and data processing. Tasks and work activities not generally suited for 
telework include, but are not limited to positions that: involve daily handling of classified 
materials; require the use of specialized equipment; require daily contact with other people; 
or where a daily physical presence is required per the official duties of the position. FEMA 
positions that are not typically suited for core telework include: inspectors, fire fighters, 
warehouse staff, and similar positions. However, these positions may still be suitable for 
Situational Telework on a case-by-case basis. The premise is that positions are eligible for 
telework and supervisors must document exceptions. 

C.  An employee suitable for telework is one who has demonstrated personal characteristics 

that are well suited to telework, as determined by the supervisor, including as a minimum: 
1.  Demonstrated dependability and the ability to handle responsibility; 
2.  A proven record of high personal motivation, independence, dependability, good time 
management skills, ability to prioritize work effectively, and ability to work without 
close supervision; 

3.  The ability to prioritize work effectively and utilize good time management skills; 
4.  A proven, or on target for, a minimum current performance rating of at least 

“proficient,” or “achieved expectations” in all performance criteria as designated by 
the FEMA performance management programs;  

5.  The employee must not be on leave restriction; and, 
6.  No adverse personnel actions within any of the following categories: 

A.  A Letter of Reprimand, a suspension without pay, or removal, imposed for 

absence without leave for more than 5 days in a calendar year or for violations of 
Subpart G of the Standards of Ethical Conduct of Employees of the Executive 
Branch for viewing, downloading, or exchanging pornography, including child 
pornography, on a Federal Government computer or while performing official 
Federal Government duties), to the extent that such action remains in the 
employee’s OPF, precludes approval of telework.   

16 

 
 
 
B.  Imposition of any other disciplinary or adverse action not included in A., above, 

within the previous six months precludes approval of telework. 

C.  Imposition of any other disciplinary or adverse action not included in A. or B., 
above, regardless of age of the action, may preclude approval of telework, in 
the discretion of the supervisor. 

D.  An employee may not be approved for telework for one year from the date of 

commencement of a performance improvement plan (PIP). 

2-3. Training 

A.  The employee must complete the telework awareness training prior to signing an initial 

telework agreement and prior to starting to telework. Training is available at: 
http://www.telework.gov/tools and resources/training/employees/index.aspx 

B.  Supervisors must complete telework awareness training in order to approve a telework 

arrangement. Training is available at: 
http://www.telework.gov/toolsandresources/training/managers/index.aspx 

2-4. Appeals 

An employee denied a request to telework may appeal to the appropriate Executive 
Level Manager.  The appeals process must ensure that the employee and management 
have a fair and equitable opportunity to be heard. Appeal decisions are binding for no 
more than six months unless circumstances change or are agreed upon by both parties 
involved in the appeal. It is FEMA policy that whenever possible, individuals be allowed to 
telework, so the burden in an appeal on why the agency would not allow telework is on the 
supervisor, not on the employee. With respect to employees covered by a collective 
bargaining agreement, appeals will be governed by the negotiated grievance procedure.  
The Telework Coordinator will notify the employee of the appeal decision. 

17 

 
 
CHAPTER 3: TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF THE TELEWORK PROGRAM 

3-1. Changes to Telework Agreement  

An employee who teleworks may be required to come into the office on their telework 
day when management makes a determination their presence is required. At least a 
one-day notice should be given to the employee, however unforeseen circumstances 
may require less notice. A teleworker who must report to the official duty station 
should do so in a reasonable amount of time. Items to take into consideration are 
traveling distance, mode of transportation, etc. Teleworkers and management should 
discuss these items. In some cases, there may not be sufficient time for the teleworker to 
report to the official duty station. Teleworkers who wish to change their scheduled 
telework day permanently should complete another agreement and obtain the proper 
approvals. Intermittent changes in a telework agreement do not require a change in the 
agreement; however teleworkers should make the request at least one day in 
advance. 

3-2. Residential Telework Environment  

A.  It is the responsibility of the employee to ensure that all the requirements to do official 

work at their residence are met in an environment that allows the tasks to be 
performed safely (See attached FEMA Form 123-9-0-2, Employee Self-Certification 
Safety and Health Checklist). 

B.  The employee must designate an area in the home as their official work area. The 
area designated must be documented on the telework agreement. The employee 
should check with their community associations, if one exists, to ensure there is not a 
restriction on working from home. 

C.  Each teleworker must understand that telework is not a substitute for dependent 

care. A caregiver, however, may be present in the home to take care of a dependent 
(e.g., infant, non-school age child and/or an elder) while the teleworker is performing 
their official duties. Children who require no supervision may be present at the alternate 
worksite. Management may request documentation from the teleworker to 
substantiate a caregiver is providing on-site or off-site care during the teleworker's 
scheduled work. 

D.  The Government is not responsible for any operating costs in the Residential 

Telework Environment that are associated with the employee's use of his or her 
personal residence as an alternate worksite. This includes home maintenance, 
insurance, or utilities. 

E.  The employee agrees to permit access to their home by agency representatives 

when necessary to ensure proper maintenance of agency-owned 
equipment.  Teleworkers should be given at least one day’s advance notice of any 
such visit. Visits should only be done during regular working hours.  

3-3. Official Duty Station  

A.  All pay, leave, and travel entitlements must be based on the employee's official 
duty station. The employee's official duty station for such purposes as special 
salary rates, locality pay adjustments, and travel is the city or town, county, and 
state in which the employee normally performs their official duties. Supervisors must 
consult with OCCHCO if there are any changes that warrant a change in the official 
duty station. 

B.  An employee's official duty station must be documented on the employee's Notification 
of Personnel Action (Standard Form 50 or equivalent). (See "Duty Station" blocks 

18 

 
 
 
38  and  39  of  the  Standard  Form  50  showing  the  city/county  and  state  in  which  the 
official worksite is located.) 

C.  An employee's official duty station would not change as long as the employee 

regularly commutes into the agency office at least twice each biweekly pay period on a 
regular and recurring basis. 

D.  If the employee does not regularly commute into the agency office at least twice 
each biweekly pay period, the official duty station must be changed to the alternate 
worksite. The official duty station would not generally be changed for employees who 
telework for medical reasons and/or in emergency situations (i.e. COOP, agency 
closures, urgent deadlines, etc.) as these types of telework arrangements are not 
intended as permanent, but on a temporary basis not to exceed six months. 

E.  When an employee’s official worksite/duty station is reassigned from the traditional 

worksite to the alternate worksite, the affected employee and his/her supervisor should 
discuss the implications of the reassignment, to include: 

1.  Certain location-based pay entitlements (e.g., locality pay, special 
rate supplements, and non-foreign cost of living allowances, etc.) are 
based on the location of the employee’s official worksite/duty station. 
2.  Reimbursement for official business travel is based on the location of the 

employee’s official worksite/duty station. For example, when an employee 
whose alternate worksite is outside the commuting area of the traditional 
worksite is required to travel to the traditional worksite, the location of the 
employee’s official worksite/duty station will determine whether the employee 
or the Component pays for the required travel. 

3.  Generally, the official worksite/duty station is used to identify the competitive 

area during reduction-in-force determinations. 

3-4. Time and Attendance, Work and Performance, and Overtime  

A.  Time spent in a telework status must be accounted for and reported in the same 

manner as if the employee reported for duty at the official duty station. The 
employee is required to satisfactorily complete all assigned work, consistent with the 
approach adopted for all other employees in the work group, and according to 
standards and guidelines in the employee's performance plan. 

B.  The employee agrees to follow their normal mission area/agency/staff office 

procedures regarding the requesting and approval of overtime, credit hours, and 
leave that are worked while in a telework status. 

C.  All approved telework hours are to be reported in the WebTA Time Attendance 
and System. Employees should code use WebTA transaction code 01- Telework 
Home <=2 days if equal to or less than two days per work week and transaction 
code 01-Telework Home >2 days for three or more days per work week. 

3-5. Reimbursable Expenses  

The FEMA Office of the Chief Financial Officer will set policy for determining any 
applicable reimbursable expenses for eligible telework employees. 

19 

 
 
 
 
3-6. Security, Supplies, and Equipment  

A.  Classified documents (hard copy or electronic) and/or equipment (e.g., diskettes, 
computers, laptops, removable hard drives, and other media used for processing 
classified information) must not  be taken to an employee's alternate worksite. For 
core telework, FOUO Information may be accessed using employee-owned 
equipment but may only be saved on government-issued equipment. 

B.  All teleworkers are responsible for the security of all official data, and the protection 

of government-issued equipment/property while carrying out the mission of 
FEMA. Government-issued equipment must only be used for official duties and 
only by the teleworker. A FEMA approved remote access solution must be used 
(such as a virtual private network or Citrix solution). Authorization to telework is 
contingent upon the availability of equipment and connectivity at the alternate 
worksite sufficient to permit the employee reliable and secure access to email, 
telephone, and any other systems necessary to perform the duties of his or her 
position efficiently and without any detriment to mission accomplishment. The 
employee is responsible for the installation, repair, and maintenance of their own 
personal equipment in coordination with CIO guidance. 

C. 

If needed, the Agency will provide necessary office supplies (paper, pens, 
compact disc , etc.). Employees should obtain these items from the official duty 
station supply room or through the regular procedure at their official duty station. 
The Agency will not reimburse employees for any supplies purchased 
independently, nor will the Agency provide office furniture except as a reasonable 
accommodation. 

D.  The agency is responsible for obtaining software licenses that are necessary to give 
the teleworker access on their personal equipment to perform their official duties. 
When the telework arrangement ends, the teleworker is responsible for removing 
and returning all government-owned software to the agency Software Manager or 
agency Chief Information Officer. The responsibilities for configuration 
management, patch and antivirus management, and other administrative 
requirements must be defined in this agreement to include the expectations of the 
teleworker in these matters. The agency is responsible for the maintenance of all 
Government-issued equipment. The teleworker may be required to bring such 
equipment into the office for maintenance. The employee must return all 
Government-issued equipment and material to the agency at the conclusion of the 
telework arrangement or at the agency's request. 

E.  FOUO Information must be transported from the official duty station to the 

alternate worksite in a secure container (e.g., briefcase with lock). Sensitive But 
Unclassified Information, including SSI, Privacy Act, and "For Official Use Only" 
data and non-sensitive, unclassified data must be stored in a secure file cabinet at 
the alternate worksite. When such information is displayed on a computer screen, it 
must not be visible to others. Computer privacy screens which block computer 
screen visibility to others must be used when SSI is displayed on a computer 
monitor at an alternate worksite. Neither family members nor other individuals 
are authorized to handle and/or view any government Sensitive But Unclassified 
Information, including SSI, Privacy Act, and "For Official Use Only" data. 

20 

 
 
 
3-7.   Worker’s Compensation and Other Liabilities  

Employees are covered by the Federal Employees Compensation Act at the alternate 
worksite as long as the injury occurred while performing their official duties and in the 
designated work area identified on the telework agreement. If an injury occurs, the 
employee must notify the supervisor immediately, provide details of the accident or 
injury, and complete Department of Labor Form CA-1, Federal Employee's Notice of 
Traumatic Injury and Claim for Continuation of Pay/Compensation. The government is not 
liable for damages to the employee's personal or real property while the employee is 
teleworking, except to the extent the government is held liable under the Federal Tort 
Claims Act or the Military and Civilian Employees Claims Act. 

3-8.   Standards of Conduct  

The employee acknowledges that he/she continues to be bound by the Standards of 
Ethical Conduct for Employees of the Executive Branch while teleworking and using 
government-issued equipment. 

3-9.   Emergency Telework.  

A.  Supervisors  and  managers  shall  classify  their  employees  as  emergency  and  non-
emergency  employees  promptly  and  appropriately,  and  shall  maximize  telework 
readiness among their employees in a manner consistent with this policy. 

B.  OPM Announcements.  Employees shall monitor, read and comply with OPM 

announcements unless otherwise directed by the Agency or their supervisors.  To 
the extent that OPM announcements conflict with FEMA and supervisory guidance, 
employees must follow FEMA and supervisory guidance.   

C.  When OPM announces that Federal agencies in the Washington, DC, area are 

open and that employees have the options of unscheduled leave or unscheduled 
telework, the following procedures apply: 

1.  Emergency Employees must report for duty as directed unless they are telework 

ready and permitted to telework by their supervisors. 

2.  Non-Emergency Employees shall notify their supervisors in advance if they 

intend to take unscheduled leave. 

3.  Non-Emergency Telework Ready Employees.  The Agency may direct non-

emergency, telework ready employees to perform unscheduled telework.  If not 
directed to telework, they must report to work, take unscheduled leave or request 
their supervisor’s permission to telework. 

D.  When OPM announces that Federal agencies in the Washington, DC, area are 

closed, or when FEMA closes an employee’s official duty station, non-emergency 
employees (including employees on pre-approved paid leave) will be granted 
excused absence (administrative leave) for the number of hours they were 
scheduled to work unless they are covered by one of the following categories: 

1.  Emergency Employees must report for duty as directed unless they are telework 

ready and permitted to telework by their supervisors. 

2.  Non-Emergency,Telework Ready Employees who are already scheduled to 

telework or who are directed to perform unscheduled telework must telework the 
entire work day.  If directed to telework, such employees may request the use of 
(1) earned annual leave, compensatory time off, credit hours, or sick leave, as 

21 

 
 
appropriate; (2) leave without pay; (3) their flexible work schedule day off or 
revision of their work hours under flexible work schedules.  On a case-by-case 
basis, FEMA supervisors may excuse a telework ready employee from duty as 
outlined in ¶ 3-9 F.   

4.  The status of employees on Leave Without Pay, official travel, or an alternate 

work schedule day off is not affected by any such announcement. 

E.  COOP Activation.  The Agency may require any employee to telework in accordance 

with an activated COOP plan.  

F.  Excusal.  Supervisors may excuse telework ready employees from work and grant 
annual or administrative leave with pay, as appropriate, when an emergency 
adversely affects the telework site (e.g., disruption of electricity, loss of heat, loss of 
connectivity, etc.), or if the teleworker faces a personal hardship that prevents him or 
her from teleworking effectively.  Dependent care needs do not ordinarily entitle a 
teleworker to administrative leave; annual leave will be granted as appropriate. 

3-10.  Telework and COOP Planning.  All organizations must incorporate telework into their 

continuity plans and procedures by: 

A.  Assessing the organization’s essential functions to identify which functions the 
organization can conduct via telework, including evaluating the use of telework for 
supporting extended continuity operations and use by non-emergency response 
group (ERG) personnel; 

B.  Establishing and maintaining plans and procedures to use telework as a primary or 
backup continuity strategy for those essential functions and supporting tasks that are 
telework authorized, based upon the assessment; 

C.  Assessing  the  capability  of  situational  telework  agreements  for  both  ERG  and  non-
ERG  personnel,  to  ensure  that  employees  may  be  authorized  to  telework  during  a 
continuity event; 

D.  Establishing situational telework agreements for all employees to determine their 

eligibility to telework during a continuity activation; 

E.  Ensuring that each eligible employee is authorized to telework during a continuity 
activation by successfully completing the required telework training program (as 
described in Section 2-3, Training) and completing necessary documentation (as 
described in Section 2-1, Telework Arrangements, Part B); and 

F.  Coordinating with FEMA’s designated Telework Managing Officer when developing 

and integrating the organization’s continuity plan. 

22 

 
 
 
 
 
FEMA MANUAL 253-11-1  
MERIT PROMOTION AND INTERNAL PLACEMENT  

APPROVAL DATE: 06/23/2015 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 

FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY 

OFFICE OF THE CHIEF COMPONENT HUMAN CAPITAL OFFICER 

 
 
Foreword 

This Manual provides guidance and policy direction for the administration, 
implementation and oversight of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) 
merit promotion and internal placement program as it applies to eligible competitive 
service employees in General Schedule (GS) (GS-1 through GS-15) positions, and their 
Federal Wage System (FWS) equivalents, both supervisory and nonsupervisory 
(including wage grade leaders and supervisors). The provisions of this Manual have 
been prepared in accordance with regulations set forth in Title 5, Code of Federal 
Regulations (C.F.R.), Part 335, Promotion and Internal Placement. This Manual 
establishes guidance for supervisors, managers, employees, and Human Resources 
(HR) Specialists on the methods and procedures to be followed for all competitive and 
noncompetitive promotions and other in-placement actions within FEMA. 

1 

 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 

1-1.  Purpose ................................................................................................................ 4 

1-2.  Applicability and Scope ........................................................................................ 4 

1-3.  Supersession ........................................................................................................ 4 

1-4.  Authorities............................................................................................................. 4 

1-5.  Policy .................................................................................................................... 4 

1-6.  Definitions ............................................................................................................. 5 

1-7.  Responsibilities ..................................................................................................... 7 

1-8.  Reporting Requirements ....................................................................................... 9 

1-9.  Questions ............................................................................................................. 9 

2-1.  Competitive Actions ............................................................................................ 10 

2-2.  Exceptions .......................................................................................................... 11 

2-3.  Priority Placement .............................................................................................. 12 

3-1.  Methods for Filling Vacancies ............................................................................. 13 

3-2.  Area of Consideration ......................................................................................... 13 

3-3.  Methods of Locating Candidates ........................................................................ 13 

4-1. 

Job Analysis ....................................................................................................... 14 

4-2.  Occupational Questionnaire ............................................................................... 14 

4-3.  Recruitment package .......................................................................................... 14 

5-1. 

Job Opportunity Announcement Information ...................................................... 15 

6-1.  Applications for Vacancy Announcement Consideration .................................... 17 

6-2.  Additional Documentation ................................................................................... 18 

6-3.  Requirements for Employees on Extended Absences ........................................ 18 

7-1.  Evaluation ........................................................................................................... 19 

7-2.  Referral ............................................................................................................... 19 

2 

 
 
7-3.  Certificate Expiration .......................................................................................... 20 

7-4.  Re-Use of Selection Certificate ........................................................................... 20 

8-1.  Review of Candidates ......................................................................................... 21 

8-2. 

Interviews ........................................................................................................... 21 

8-3.  Reference Checks .............................................................................................. 21 

8-4.  Selection Decisions ............................................................................................ 21 

8-5.  Release of Candidates ....................................................................................... 22 

8-6.  Notification to Candidates ................................................................................... 22 

9-1.  Complaints.......................................................................................................... 23 

9-2.  Reconsideration .................................................................................................. 23 

10-1.  Recordkeeping ................................................................................................... 24 

11-1.  Review and Evaluation ....................................................................................... 25 

3 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1 - GENERAL INFORMATION 

1-1.  Purpose 

This Manual establishes the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) 
policy and plan for the merit promotion and internal placement of its eligible 
competitive service employees in General Schedule (GS) and Federal Wage 
System (FWS) equivalent positions. The purposes of this Manual is to ensure 
promotions and other actions, either competitive or noncompetitive, are made on 
the basis of merit, and are based on systematic and equitable procedures.  

1-2.  Applicability and Scope 

This merit promotion and internal placement Manual covers all permanent 
General Schedule positions (GS-1 through GS-15) in the competitive service, 
and their Federal Wage System equivalents, both supervisory and 
nonsupervisory (including wage grade leaders and supervisors). 

1-3.  Supersession 

This Manual supersedes FEMA Manual 253-11-1, Merit Promotion and Internal 
Placement, dated July 28, 2014. 

1-4.  Authorities 

A.  Department of Homeland Security (DHS), Management Directive (MD) 255-

05, dated May 31, 2007. 

B.  Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.), Part 335, Promotion and 

Internal Placement. 

C.  5 C.F.R., Part 330, Subpart F, Agency Career Transition Assistance Plan 
(CTAP) for Local Surplus and Displaced Employees, and Subpart G 
Interagency Career Transition Assistance Plan (ICTAP) for Displaced 
Employees. 

D.  5 C.F.R., Part 330, Subpart B, Reemployment Priority List (RPL).  

E.  Title 5, United States Code (U.S.C.), Part III, Subpart B, Employment and 

Retention. 

F.  5 U.S.C. §§ 2301, Merit System Principles, and 2302, Prohibited Personnel 

Practices. 

1-5.  Policy 

It is the policy of FEMA to:  

A.  Staff positions with the best qualified persons available. 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
B.  Develop and use FEMA employees to the maximum extent possible 

consistent with the goals and objectives of the Agency. 

C.  Ensure that all personnel actions are effected without regard to political, 

religious, or labor organization affiliation or non-affiliation, marital or family 
status, race, color, gender, sexual orientation, national origin, disability, 
genetic information, age, or prior EEO activity, and without regard to criteria 
unrelated to the position, such as personal friendship or patronage, and that 
selections are based solely on job-related criteria. 

D.  Keep employees informed of positions being staffed under this Manual so that 

they may indicate their interest in such positions. 

E.  Fill positions under this Manual consistent with the Agency’s Federal Equal 

Opportunity Recruitment Program (FEORP) 

F.  Ensure that where a negotiated agreement contains an article concerning 

merit promotion, that the article in the negotiated agreement augments this 
policy for bargaining unit employees. 

1-6.  Definitions 

A.  Area of Consideration. The geographical and/or organizational area from 
which applications for a specific job announcement are being accepted. 

B.  Career Ladder. The formal grade progression of an employee within an 
occupational series that represents increasing levels of difficulty and 
responsibility.  

C.  Career Ladder Promotion. The promotion of an employee without further 

competition when the competition was held at an earlier stage. 

D.  Career Transition Assistance Program (CTAP). The Agency’s program that 

assists its surplus and displaced employees by providing selection priority for 
competitive service vacancies.  

E.  Competitive Service. All civilian positions that are (a) in the executive branch 

of the Federal Government not specifically excepted from civil service laws by 
or pursuant to statute, by the President or by the Office of Personnel 
Management, and not in the Senior Executive Service and (b) all positions in 
the legislative and judicial branches of the Federal Government and in the 
District of Columbia Government specifically made subject to the civil service 
by statute.  

F.  Detail. The temporary assignment of an employee to different duties or to a 

different position for a specified period of time. For pay purposes, the 
employee continues to occupy his or her permanent position of record.  

G.  Full Performance Level. The highest level of work projected within a career 
ladder or in association with a position’s established promotion potential. 

5 

 
 
 
H.  Interagency Career Transition Assistance Program (ICTAP). The Agency’s 
plan that provides eligible, well-qualified surplus or displaced non-Agency 
employees selection priority over almost any other applicant from outside the 
Agency.   

I.  Job Analysis. The systematic review of a position to identify the basic duties 

and responsibilities; the knowledge, skills, abilities, and competencies 
required to perform the duties and responsibilities; and the factors that are 
important in evaluating candidates for the position. 

J.  Local Commuting Area. As defined in 5 C.F.R. § 351.203, the geographic 

locality that constitutes one area for employment purposes, as determined by 
the Agency. It includes any population center and the surrounding localities 
within which people live and can reasonably be expected to travel back and 
forth daily to their usual place of employment. 

K.  Noncompetitive Action. As defined in 5 C.F.R. § 210.102(b)(8), a promotion, 
demotion, reassignment, transfer, reinstatement, or appointment based on 
prior service that does not require competition. 

L.  Occupational Questionnaire. An instrument designated for the evaluation of 
candidates for a specific position. Assessment questions are developed 
based on the knowledge, skills, abilities, and competencies identified during 
the job analysis process. 

M.  Promotion. The change of an employee to a higher grade when both the old 
and the new positions are under the General Schedule, or under the same 
type of graded wage schedule. 

N.  Qualified Candidates. Those candidates who meet the minimum qualification 
requirements established by OPM, as well as any selective placement factors 
critical to successful performance in the position.  

O.  Qualification Standards. The experience, education, training or other criteria 

developed by the Office of Personnel Management for a specific occupational 
series and grade level.  

P.  Reassignment. The change of an employee from one position description to 
another position description within the Agency, and without promotion or 
demotion. 

Q.  Reemployment Priority List (RPL). A list that the Agency maintains to give 

reemployment priority to any career or career-conditional competitive service 
employee who may have been separated through reduction-in-force or as a 
result of recovery from a compensable injury after more than one year.  

R.  Reinstatement Eligibility. Individuals who previously held a competitive 

service career or career conditional appointment with the Federal government 
may be eligible for reinstatement, which allows reentry to the Federal 
competitive workforce without competing with the public.  

S.  Selective Placement Factors. The specific knowledge, skills and abilities not 
prescribed by OPM’s Qualification Standards, but which are essential to 

6 

 
 
successful job performance and cannot be learned on the job in a reasonable 
time period. The necessity for the particular factor must be documented in the 
position description and identified through the job analysis.  

T.  Subject Matter Expert (SME). A person with expert knowledge about what it 

takes to do a particular job. 

U.  Well-qualified. For the purposes of the CTAP and ICTAP, those applicants 
with a rating of 85.0 or greater and who meet all qualification requirements, 
including any selective placement factors.  

1-7.  Responsibilities 

A.  The Office of the Chief Component Human Capital Officer (OCCHCO) is 

responsible for:  

1.  Developing, administering, and implementing a written merit promotion 
program that ensures a systematic means of selection for promotion 
according to merit;  

2.  Providing technical guidance, advice and assistance to supervisors and 

managers on the overall operation of the Manual; 

3.  Providing timely and efficient service to operating officials on the 

recruitment, selection and placement of applicants referred under this 
Manual;  

4.  Reviewing all actions taken under this Manual - whether identification, 
qualification, evaluation, or selection of candidates - and ensuring that 
they are made fairly and without regard to political, religious, or labor 
organization affiliation or non-affiliation, marital status, race, color, sex, 
sexual orientation, national origin, disability, genetic information, age, or 
prior EEO activity, without regard to criteria unrelated to the position such 
as friendship or patronage; and that selections made are based solely on 
job-related criteria;  

5.  Ensuring that all candidates for placement who are evaluated under this 

Manual meet the minimum qualification standards as prescribed by OPM; 

6.  Approving any modifications to the qualification requirements for in-service 

placement actions as prescribed in Section 8(c) of the OPM General 
Schedule Qualifications Policy; 

7.  Ensuring that FEMA employees are provided with information on the basic 
principles and procedures available, and the means by which they can be 
considered for placement and promotion;  

8.  Having procedures in place that allow those FEMA employees who are 

absent for legitimate reasons (e.g., on detail, on leave, at training courses, 
on active military duty, out due to a compensable injury, or serving in 
public international organizations or on Intergovernmental Personnel 

7 

 
 
 
Mobility Act assignments), to receive appropriate consideration for 
promotion and placement;  

9.  Maintaining adequate recordkeeping of all promotion and placement 
actions, while ensuring that individuals’ right to privacy are protected. 
Sufficient records of each promotion action will be maintained to allow 
reconstruction of the promotion action, including documentation on how 
candidates were rated and ranked; and 

10. Ensuring that FEMA HR specialists recuse themselves from participating 
in any merit promotion activities for which there is a conflict of interest.  

B.  Managers and supervisors are responsible for: 

1.  Acting in accordance with the provisions of this Manual and in compliance 
with the Merit System Principles and without violation of the Prohibited 
Personnel Practices;  

2.  Ensuring that selecting officials and subject matter experts (SMEs) provide 
HR Specialists with thorough position information and requisite program 
resources for proper recruitment, evaluation, and selection of candidates; 

3.  Considering candidates fairly, objectively, consistently, and in a timely 

manner;  

4.  Ensuring that all employees have access to this Manual’s procedures and 

are fully informed of promotional opportunities as they arise;  

5.  Communicating merit promotion opportunities to employees who are 

absent for legitimate reasons (e.g., on detail, on leave, at training courses, 
on active military duty, out due to a compensable injury, or serving in 
public international organizations or on an Intergovernmental Personnel 
Mobility Act assignment), in order that they receive appropriate 
consideration for promotion and placement;  

6.  Making selections for appropriate vacancies from among the best qualified 

candidates; and  

7.  Upon request, providing guidance and advice on how an employee can 

improve or strengthen his/her qualifications. 

C.  FEMA employees are responsible for:  

1.  Managing their career progression and development;  

2.  Becoming familiar with the provisions and requirements of this Manual;  

3.  Applying for those promotion and placement opportunities for which they 

wish to be considered;  

4.  Providing current, accurate information regarding their knowledge, skills, 
abilities, work experience, training, education, and awards as required by 
the vacancy announcement; and  

5.  Participating on rating panels or serving as a SME as needed.  

8 

 
 
D.  Human Resources (HR) Specialists are responsible for:  

1.  Acting in accordance with the provisions of this Manual and adhering to 

the Merit System Principles and preventing Prohibited Personnel 
Practices;  

2.  Counseling employees regarding merit promotion procedures, promotion 

opportunities, qualification requirements and the results of merit promotion 
actions;  

3.  Recruiting the best qualified and available candidates; 

4.  Guiding the resolution of merit promotion complaints and grievances; 

5.  Providing managers, supervisors and employees technically sound 
guidance regarding merit promotion and related staffing matters; 

6.  Ensuring that assessment questionnaires are job-related, objective, and 

measurable using the job analysis process; 

7.  Maintaining all merit promotion records as required by the provisions of 

this Manual; and 

8.  Recusing themselves from merit promotion activities for which there is a 

conflict of interest. 

E.  Director, Office of Equal Rights, is responsible for ensuring that actions taken 
under this Manual are in compliance with the Federal Equal Opportunity 
Recruitment Program, and are taken without regard to race, color, religion, 
age, gender, national origin, political affiliation, disability, genetic information, 
sex, sexual orientation, marital or family status, membership in an employee 
organization, prior EEO activity, or any other non-merit factor.  

1-8.  Reporting Requirements 

OCCHCO will report data related to merit promotion and internal placement as 
required by DHS and OPM. 

1-9.  Questions 

Questions concerning Merit Promotion & Internal Placement should be 
addressed to the Office of the Chief Component Human Capital Officer at (202) 
646-3962. 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 2 - ACTIONS COVERED 

2-1.  Competitive Actions  

The competitive procedures established by this Manual apply to the following 
placement actions:  

A.  Time-limited promotions for more than 120 days to a higher-graded position. 
(Note: Prior service during the preceding 12 months under noncompetitive 
time-limited promotions and noncompetitive details to higher graded positions 
count toward the 120-day total.)  

1.  A temporary promotion may be made permanent without further 

competition provided the temporary promotion was originally made under 
competitive procedures and that it might lead to a permanent promotion 
was made known to all candidates.  

2.  The Agency must give the employee advance written notice of the 

conditions under which the time-limited promotion is given, including the 
time limit of the promotion; the requirement for competition beyond 120 
days; and that the employee may be returned at any time to the position 
from which temporarily promoted, or to a different position of equivalent 
grade and pay, when the return is not subject to the procedures in 5 
C.F.R., Part 351, Reduction in Force; Part 432, Performance Based 
Reduction in Grade and Removal Actions; Part 752, Adverse Actions; and 
Part 771, Agency Administrative Grievance System.  

3.  A temporarily promoted employee may not be reassigned to a position 
with a higher grade or with promotion potential higher than his or her 
permanent position without the use of competitive procedures. A formal 
personnel action must be used to document all temporary promotions, 
including their termination.  

4.  Employees who are temporarily promoted must meet all requirements of a 

permanent promotion, including time-in-grade and the Qualifications 
Standards for General Schedule Positions or Job Qualifications System 
for Trades and Labor Occupations System qualification requirements of 
the new position. 

B.  Details for more than 120 days to a higher graded position or to a position 

with higher promotion potential. (Note: Prior service during the preceding 12 
months under noncompetitive detail to higher graded positions and 
noncompetitive time-limited promotions count toward the 120-day total.)   

C.  Selection for training that is part of an authorized training agreement, part of a 
promotion program, or required before an employee may be considered for a 
promotion. 

D.  Reassignment or Change to Lower Grade to a position with more promotion 

potential than a position previously held on a permanent basis in the 
competitive service (except as permitted by reduction-in-force regulations). 

10 

 
 
E.  Transfer to a position at a higher grade or with more promotion potential than 
a position previously held on a permanent basis in the competitive service. 

F.  Reinstatement to a permanent or temporary position at a higher grade or with 
more promotion potential than a position previously held on a permanent 
basis in the competitive service.  

G.  Promotion, demotion or reassignment of an employee serving under an 

indefinite appointment in a competitive position, except that this authority may 
not be used to move an employee:  

1.  From a position in which an initial overseas limited appointment is 

authorized to another position; or  

2.  To a position in which an initial overseas limited appointment is authorized 

from another position. 

2-2.  Exceptions 

The following actions are exceptions to competitive procedures outlined in this 
Manual.  

A.  A promotion resulting from the upgrading of a position without significant 
change in the duties and responsibilities due to the issuance of a new 
classification standard or the correction of an initial classification error. 

B.  A position change permitted by reduction-in-force procedures. 

C.  A promotion without current competition of an employee who was appointed 
in the competitive service from a civil service register, by direct hire, by 
noncompetitive appointment or noncompetitive conversion, or under 
competitive promotion procedures for an assignment intended to prepare the 
employee for the position being filled. (This is a career ladder promotion, the 
intent of which must be made a matter of record and documented in the 
promotion plan, and which requires the employee’s current rating of record be 
“proficient” or higher.) 

D.  A promotion resulting from an employee’s position being classified at a higher 

grade based on accretion of duties and responsibilities.  

E.  A temporary promotion, or detail to a higher graded position or to a position 

with known promotion potential of 120 days or less. 

F.  Promotion to a grade previously held on a permanent basis in the competitive 
service from which the employee was separated or demoted for reasons 
other than performance or conduct.  

G.  Promotion, reassignment, demotion, transfer, reinstatement, or detail to a 

position having promotion potential no greater than the potential of a position 
an employee currently holds or previously held on a permanent basis in the 
competitive service and did not lose because of performance or conduct 
reasons. 

11 

 
 
 
H.  Consideration of a candidate not given proper consideration in a competitive 

promotion action.  

I.  Appointments of career Senior Executive Service appointees with competitive 
service reinstatement eligibility to any position for which they qualify in the 
competitive service at any grade or salary level, including Senior-Level 
positions established under 5 C.F.R., Part 319—Employment in Senior-Level 
and Scientific and Professional positions. 

2-3.  Priority Placement 

Before taking any action to fill a vacancy, either competitively or 
noncompetitively, the HR Specialist, in conjunction with the selecting official, is 
responsible for ensuring the requirements pertaining to priority consideration are 
adhered to. Priority placement programs include the following: 

Career Transition Assistance Program (CTAP) – When filling vacancies from 
within DHS, the HR Specialist and selecting official, will ensure consideration is 
first given to well-qualified CTAP eligibles in the local commuting area. A well-
qualified CTAP eligible within the local commuting area must be selected before 
selecting any other candidate from within or outside DHS. 

Department of Homeland Security Priority Placement Program (DPPP) – When 
seeking candidates outside FEMA’s workforce for vacant positions, priority 
placement will be given to FEMA employees whose positions were downgraded 
and are entitled to grade retention. In rare instances, an individual exception may 
be granted. 

Interagency Career Transition Assistance Program (ICTAP) - When filling 
vacancies from outside DHS workforce, the HR Specialist and selecting official 
will ensure priority consideration is given to well-qualified ICTAP eligibles in the 
local commuting area. Selection priority will be applied unless the personnel 
action to be taken is an exception to ICTAP, as defined in 5 C.F.R. § 330.707. 

Reemployment Priority List (RPL) – When filling vacancies from outside DHS 
workforce, hiring preference will be given to eligible RPL registrants in the local 
commuting area who are deemed qualified for the position. When a qualified RPL 
registrant is available, the position may not be filled by a new appointment unless 
the individual appointed is a 10-point veteran, by transfer (outside of DHS), or by 
reemployment unless the individual is a preference eligible or is exercising 
restoration or reemployment rights.  

12 

 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 3 - AREA OF CONSIDERATION 

3-1.  Methods for Filling Vacancies 

Vacancies may be filled by any appropriate method including special placement 
programs, new appointment, reassignment, transfer, reinstatement, promotion, 
etc. 

3-2.  Area of Consideration 

The area of consideration should be sufficiently broad to ensure a reasonable 
number of highly qualified candidates for the position to be filled. Area of 
consideration determinations must be made prior to announcing the position(s), 
documented in the merit promotion file, and clearly specified in the vacancy 
announcement.  

A.  For positions at GS-13 and above, the minimum area of consideration will be 

FEMA nationwide.  

B.  For positions at GS-12 and below, the minimum area of consideration will be 

the duty station in which the position is located.  

C.  Exceptions that reduce the area of consideration must be approved in writing 

by the Chief Component Human Capital Officer.   

3-3.  Methods of Locating Candidates 

In its search for qualified applicants, the selecting official and OCCHCO should 
determine which source or sources to use, based on the Agency’s mission, 
objectives, and its Federal Equal Opportunity Recruitment Program. The Agency 
may use any of the following options:  

A.  Announce the vacancy to FEMA status candidates only.  

B.  Announce the vacancy to FEMA employees and other status eligibles as 

determined in OPM regulations. 

C.  In addition to the merit promotion process, request certification of eligibles 

from OPM or FEMA’s Delegated Examining Unit (DEU) in addition to items A 
and/or B above.  

D.  Consider other appropriate sources, such as reinstatement, transfer, persons 

with disabilities, or Veterans Recruitment Appointment eligibles, etc. 

13 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 4 - INITIATING RECRUITMENT 

4-1.  Job Analysis 

Prior to initiating a recruitment action, the selecting official or his/her designated 
subject matter expert, in conjunction with the HR Specialist, will conduct a job 
analysis. The job analysis will identify the basic duties and responsibilities of the 
position, knowledge, skills, abilities, and/or competencies required to perform 
those duties and responsibilities, and the importance of each knowledge, skill, 
ability, or competency. The use of any selective placement factors will be 
documented in the job analysis to show the relevancy or the specific proficiency 
or factor as being essential for successful performance of the job. 

The job analysis must be approved by the selecting official or subject matter 
expert and the HR Specialist prior to issuance of the vacancy announcement.  

4-2.  Occupational Questionnaire 

The selecting official or subject matter expert, in conjunction with the HR 
Specialist, will develop questions for each knowledge, skill, ability, or competency 
identified in the job analysis. The HR Specialist will ensure that the questions 
make clear distinctions between creditable levels of qualifications and contain 
appropriate measures.  

The scoring of the occupational questionnaire will be based on the importance of 
each knowledge, skill, ability and competency, as identified by the selecting 
official or subject matter expert in the job analysis. The assessment 
questionnaire scoring will be clearly documented for each merit promotion action. 

The occupational questionnaire and associated scoring must be approved by the 
selecting official or subject matter expert and the HR Specialist prior to issuance 
of the vacancy announcement.  

4-3.  Recruitment package 

To initiate a vacancy, the selecting official will submit a recruitment package to 
OCCHCO. Failure to submit a complete recruitment package will result in the HR 
Specialist returning the package to the Program Office. The following documents 
are required in the recruitment package: 

A.  SF-52, Request for Personnel Action, with the necessary approvals within the 

Program Office and the Office of the Chief Financial Officer; 

B.  Classified position description(s); 

C.  Job analysis, including justification for a selective placement factor (if 

applicable); and 

D.  Occupational questionnaire. 

14 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 5 - VACANCY ANNOUNCEMENTS 

5-1.  Job Opportunity Announcement Information 

Job Opportunity Announcements (JOAs) will be open for a minimum of 5 
calendar days and posted on USAJOBS. At a minimum, each JOA must include 
the following:  

A.  Agency name and the announcement number;  

B.  Opening and closing dates, including any cut-off dates, if applicable; 

C.  Position title, series, grade, and salary range; 

D.  Duty location and number of vacancies; 

E.  Promotion potential, if any; 

F.  Principal job duties; 

G.  Qualification requirements including any selective factors (if applicable); 

H.  Basis for rating, including knowledge, skills, abilities and/or competencies;  

I.  An explanation of how to apply, including a point of contact with a telephone 

number and email address; 

J.  Required application materials (e.g., resume, SF-50, DD-214); 
K.  FEMA’s definition of “well-qualified,” for CTAP and ICTAP; 

L.  Equal Employment Opportunity statement; 

M.  Reasonable Accommodation Statement; 

N.  Privacy Act Notice; 

O.  A link to the Common Definitions under the “Who May Apply” section;  

P.  The DHS Branding Statement under the “Job Summary” section; 

Q.  The National Service Experience Language under the “Qualifications” section;  

R.  The Benefits Language under the “Benefits” section; 

S.  The E-Verify Language under the “Other Information” section;  

T.  Emergency Assignment Statement that reads as follows: Every FEMA 

employee has regular and recurring emergency management 
responsibilities, though not every position requires routine deployment to 
disaster sites. All positions are subject to recall around the clock for 
emergency management operations, which may require irregular work hours, 
work at locations other than the official duty station, and may include duties 
other than those specified in the employee’s official position description. 
Travel requirements in support of emergency operations may be extensive in 
nature (weeks to months), with little advance notice, and may require 
employees to relocate to emergency sites with physically austere and 
operationally challenging conditions; and 

15 

 
 
U.  Other essential information, such as tour of duty, telework eligibility, 
hazardous conditions, travel required, need for a security clearance, 
Financial Disclosure Statement requirement, moving expenses being 
paid/not paid, and managerial/supervisory probationary period requirement. 

16 

 
 
 
 
6-1.  Applications for Vacancy Announcement Consideration 

CHAPTER 6 - APPLICATIONS 

In order to receive consideration, the following required documentation must be 
submitted online by 11:59 pm Eastern Time on the closing date of the 
announcement: 

A.  Resume from any source and in the format of applicants’ choice. 

B.  Answers to a set of job-related questions (occupational questionnaire). 

C.  Program specific supporting documents  

1.  All Federal employees serving under a career or career-conditional 

appointment in the competitive service – A copy of the employee’s latest 
SF-50, Notification of Personnel Action reflecting grade, step, tenure, 
position occupied, and salary information. Applicants who do not provide 
this documentation by the closing date will not be considered for the 
position. 

2.  CTAP/ICTAP eligibles - A copy of the Agency notice, most recent 
performance rating, and SF-50, Notification of Personnel Action, 
identifying your current position, grade level, and duty location. Applicants 
who not provide this documentation by the closing date will not be 
considered as CTAP/ICTAP eligibles and therefore will not receive priority 
consideration.  

3.  Veterans Employment Opportunities Act and/or Veterans Recruitment Act 

eligibles – Member copy 4 of the DD-214 (Certificate of Release or 
Discharge from Active Duty) and/or documentation of service-connected 
disability. Applicants who have been discharged or released from active 
duty service may submit written documentation from the armed forces that 
certifies they are expected to be discharged or released under honorable 
conditions no later than 120 days after the date the documentation is 
signed. Applicants who do not provide this documentation by the closing 
date will not be considered for the position. 

4.  Schedule A eligibles - Documentation regarding Schedule A eligibility from 

a licensed medical professional, a licensed vocational rehabilitation 
specialist or any Federal agency, state agency or agency of the District of 
Columbia or a US territory that provides disability benefits. Applicants who 
do not provide this documentation by the closing date will not be 
considered as a Schedule A eligible and therefore will not receive 
consideration as a non-competitive eligible. 

5.  Other non-competitive eligibles (e.g., Peace Corps volunteers) – 

Documentation reflecting non-competitive eligibility must be submitted. 
Applicants who do not provide this documentation by the closing date will 
not receive consideration as a non-competitive eligible. 

D.  Other required documentation 

17 

 
 
Applicants must submit any other required documentation as listed in the 
vacancy announcement. This includes but is not limited to transcripts or listing 
of completed coursework for positions which require education as a minimum 
requirement. 

6-2.  Additional Documentation 

At any point in the application process, the applicant may be required to submit 
additional documentation including a current performance appraisal and 
references. 

6-3.  Requirements for Employees on Extended Absences 

Supervisors and managers will ensure that employees within the area of 
consideration who are absent from their positions for legitimate reasons (e.g. 
compensable injury, Intergovernmental Personnel Act assignments, military 
service, etc.) receive appropriate consideration for positions for which they have 
indicated in writing before departure that they wish to receive consideration. The 
employee is responsible for informing his/her supervisor or manager of those job 
opportunities for which he/she wishes to be considered during periods of 
absence, and for providing his/her supervisor or manager with contact 
information (i.e., email address, phone number, fax number). The supervisor or 
manager will be responsible for contacting the employee to provide vacancy 
information.  

18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 7 - EVALUATION AND REFERRAL OF CANDIDATES 

7-1.  Evaluation 

Upon the vacancy announcement closing, completed application packages will 
be reviewed to ensure they meet the necessary eligibility and qualification 
requirements. All eligibility and qualification determinations will be fully 
documented in the case file. For technical positions, the HR Specialist may 
request the assistance of a subject matter expert in the review of applications for 
qualification requirements. The subject matter expert, who assists in the review 
of applications, must be at the equivalent or higher grade level than the full 
performance level of the position being filled and may not be the supervisor 
and/or selecting official of the position to be reviewed and filled. 

A.  Eligibility 

All candidates must satisfy all legal and regulatory requirements, including 
time-in-grade and time-after-competitive appointment, within 30 days of the 
closing date of the announcement. In addition, candidates must have 
submitted the necessary supporting documentation in order to receive 
consideration (e.g., CTAP/ICTAP eligibility).   

B.  Qualifications 

Candidates must meet the minimum qualification requirements as prescribed 
by OPM, as well as any selective factors (if applicable), within 30 days of the 
closing date of the announcement in order to receive consideration. 
Candidates will be evaluated solely on submitted application materials. 

7-2.  Referral 

A certificate will be issued for each grade level for which the position was 
advertised and qualified candidates exist.  

A.  Merit Promotion Certificate 

Merit promotion candidates are eligible to be considered either competitively 
or non-competitively based on the requirements outlined in Chapter 2 of this 
manual. Candidates eligible for consideration competitively are placed on the 
merit promotion certificate. Candidates eligible for consideration non-
competitively are placed on the non-competitive certificate. Competitive 
candidates eligible for consideration under a special hiring authority (i.e., 30 
percent or more disabled veterans, Schedule A – appointment of individuals 
with disabilities, Peace Corps volunteers, Veterans Recruitment Appointment, 
etc.) can also be placed on a non-competitive certificate. 

Up to fifteen candidates, with a rating of 85.00 or above and who are solely 
eligible to be considered competitively, will be referred on a Merit Promotion 
certificate for any one vacant position. Two additional candidates will be 
referred for each additional vacancy. Candidates will be referred in 
alphabetical order by last name.  

19 

 
 
 
In cases where there are more than fifteen candidates and tied ratings are 
present, a tie-breaker will be used to determine the fifteen best qualified 
candidates. Any of the following tie breaking methods may be used. 
Regardless which procedure(s) is/are utilized, the case file will be 
documented for reconstruction purposes.  

1.  Name Request: The selecting official may submit a name request within 

the tied range. 

2.  Random Number: Ties are broken randomly using the last digit of 

eligibles’ social security numbers in conjunction with random numbers. 

B.  Non-Competitive Certificate: All qualified candidates that are eligible to be 
considered non-competitively (i.e., laterals/reassignments, non-competitive 
reinstatements, or transfers) and those eligible for consideration under a 
special hiring authority (e.g., 30 percent or more disabled veterans, Schedule 
A – appointment of individuals with disabilities, Peace Corps volunteers, etc.) 
will be separately referred in alphabetical order by last name on a Non-
Competitive referral list.  

All qualified candidates eligible for consideration under the Veterans 
Recruitment Appointment hiring authority will be referred in veterans 
preference order on a separate non-competitive referral list.  

7-3.  Certificate Expiration 

Certificates will be valid for 15 days from the date of issuance. The 15 day period 
may be extended at the determination of the OCCHCO; however, the certificate 
may not exceed the certificates’ validity period of three months from the date of 
issuance. An extension request must be submitted in writing to the HR Specialist. 
The CCHCO or designee will notify the Program Office in writing of the decision 
to grant or deny the extension request. 

7-4.  Re-Use of Selection Certificate 

A selecting official may make additional selection(s) following the initial date of 
selection provided that: 

A.  The selection certificate has not expired; 

B.  The position is the same title, series, grade, and geographic location; 

C.  The qualification requirements for the additional selection(s) are the same as 

the position originally announced; and 

D.  The initial vacancy announcement stated that multiple selections may be 

made. 

20 

 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 8 - SELECTION AND NOTIFICATION TO CANDIDATES 

8-1.  Review of Candidates 

The selecting official will review application packages submitted by each of the 
referred candidates and uniformly consider each candidate using job-related 
criteria appropriate to the position being filled and consistent with merit system 
principles. 

Due weight will be given to performance appraisals and incentive awards 
documented in application packages during the evaluation/rating review and/or at 
the time of final selection consideration. Appraisals and awards should be 
considered additional sources of information and used as an indicator of the 
quality of prior experience and should only be given consideration to the extent 
that the information is relevant to the requirements of the position being filled. 
Consideration of appraisals should only be given to the content of the appraisal, 
not to the performance appraisal system. The mere possession of a specific 
number of appraisal levels or awards amounts are not factors used in the 
evaluation process and should not be used to mechanically increase ratings. 

8-2. 

Interviews 

The selecting official will determine which candidates to interview and will 
designate individuals to participate in the interview process. Interview panels will 
be used for all positions and should be diverse to the greatest extent possible. 
Panels will consist of three employees at an equivalent or higher grade level than 
the full performance level of the position being filled who are not supervised by 
the position.  

Selecting officials in the hiring office are responsible for retaining documentation 
of interviews and discussions that pertain to selection or non-selection of 
candidates. This documentation should be sufficient to allow the decisions made 
and actions taken to be reconstructed if necessary. This documentation must be 
kept for a minimum of 2 years, or until the original case file in the OCCHCO has 
been reviewed and destroyed.  

8-3.  Reference Checks 

Selecting officials will conduct reference checks prior to making a final selection. 
Reference checks should be conducted with current and former supervisors. 

8-4.  Selection Decisions 

Selecting officials will annotate their selectee, and alternate selections (including 
order of selection) on the certificate. Should no selections be made, the selecting 
official will provide a written explanation. 

21 

 
 
 
 
 
 
8-5.  Release of Candidates 

The official request for the release of an employee selected through merit 
promotion procedures will be made only by the HR Specialist. Normally, 
employees selected will be released from their current position within 2 weeks of 
the date the candidate is notified of his/her selection or at the end of the first full 
pay period after a release date has been officially requested. However, under 
extenuating circumstances, managers may request to extend a release date for 
up to 30 days. If the selection involves an immediate promotion, the promotion 
should occur within 2 weeks of the date the candidate is notified of his/her 
selection or at the beginning of the first full pay period after the selection is made. 
Any decision regarding the establishment of a release date should take into 
consideration employee concerns, workload requirements, and agency mission 
objectives. 

8-6.  Notification to Candidates 

The HR Specialist will notify all candidates of receipt of their application, eligibility 
and qualifications determination, certification referral, and final status of their 
application. The HR Specialist will make the official job offer to the Selectee. 

22 

 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 9 - COMPLAINTS AND RECONSIDERATION 

9-1.  Complaints 

Employees have the right to file a complaint relating to a promotion action. The 
standards for adjudicating complaints are set forth in 5 C.F.R., Part 300 -
Employment (General). Such complaints shall be resolved under the appropriate 
procedures:  

A.  If the complaint involves a matter covered by a specific provision of a 

negotiated agreement with a recognized employee union and the employee is 
a member of the bargaining unit, the grievance or complaint must be filed 
under negotiated procedures. If the complaint involves a candidate who is not 
in a bargaining unit, the grievance must be filed under the administrative 
grievance policy. Non-selection from among a group of properly ranked and 
certified candidates is not an appropriate basis for a grievance.  

B.  Applicants who feel they have been discriminated against because of their 
race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, physical/mental disability, 
genetic information, or retaliation for prior EEO activity may file a complaint 
under 29 C.F.R. § 1614.103(a), use the negotiated grievance procedures if 
they are included in the bargaining unit, or use the administrative grievance 
procedure if they are not. 

9-2.  Reconsideration  

Applicants who wish to request a reconsideration of rating must submit a request 
in writing to the OCCHCO indicating why the original decision was not 
appropriate.  

The OCCHCO will conduct a review of the application package to determine 
whether the candidate received proper consideration for the vacancy. The 
OCCHCO will respond in writing with the reasons for the decision, without unduly 
compromising the rating schedule.  

If the reconsideration request leads to a rating change, the HR Specialist will take 
immediate steps to correct the error and ensure that the candidate receives the 
proper consideration under the vacancy. 

If a selection has already been made, priority consideration may be appropriate if 
the candidate's name should have been referred to the selecting official, but was 
not. Priority consideration will be given for a period of 6 months for the next 
equivalent vacancy. Equivalent positions will generally be located in the same 
commuting area and have the same title, series, grade, full performance level, 
and mandatory competencies. The HR Specialist will provide the application to 
the selecting official for consideration. The selecting official must consider the 
candidate for the vacant position, but is under no obligation to select the 
candidate.  

23 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 10 - RECORDKEEPING 

10-1.  Recordkeeping 

All merit promotion files will be maintained by the OCCHCO for a minimum of two 
years. Records pertinent to a pending grievance or EEO complaint must be 
retained for a minimum of two years following resolution of the case. At a 
minimum, the following information must be retained in the merit promotion file:  

A.  Vacancy announcement; 

B.  Classified position description for all grade levels;  

C.  Signed job analysis to include justification for selective placement factor, if 

applicable; 

D.  Occupational questionnaire and associated scoring; 

E.  Application packages received from each applicant; 

F.  Names of all candidates and qualification determinations made by HR 

Specialist or SME; 

G.  Names and ratings of all qualified candidates; 

H.  Merit Promotion Certificate and Non-Competitive List of Eligibles with 

annotated selection decisions, signed and dated by the HR Specialist and the 
selecting official; 

I.  Notification to applicants;  

J.  Completed SF-52, Request for Personnel Action with appropriate nature of 

action, legal authority, and remarks; and 

K.  Any other personnel or employment record made or kept having to do with 

the selection and/or promotion, including, but not limited to, any notes taken 
during interviews by any interviewing official. 

24 

 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 11 - REVIEW AND EVALUATION 

11-1.  Review and Evaluation 

The OCCHCO will conduct a review and evaluation of its operation of the Merit 
Promotion Program at least every three years. The review will include input from 
supervisors, managers and employees. Topics will include, at a minimum:  

A.  Assessment of the effectiveness and usefulness of the promotion plan. 

B.  Review of personnel actions processed during the evaluation period to 
determine that actions were taken in compliance with pertinent laws, 
regulations, and the provisions of this Manual.  

C.  Review of the adequacy and timeliness of the Agency’s response to 

employees’ complaints relative to merit promotion actions and procedures. 

D.  Review of the extent to which employees, managers and supervisors are fully 

informed of the provisions of this Manual. 

25 

 
 
FEMA MANUAL 252-2-1  
POSITION MANAGEMENT AND CLASSIFICATION 
APPROVAL DATE: 06/19/2014 (REVISION) 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 

FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY 

OFFICE OF THE CHIEF COMPONENT HUMAN CAPITAL OFFICER 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Foreword 

This Manual provides policy and procedures for employees, supervisors, and managers 
throughout the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) on position 
management and classification. The classification system and standards are tools for 
assisting management in accomplishing the Agency's mission and ensuring equal pay 
for substantially equal work. It assists in management activities such as designing 
organizations, recruiting for necessary expertise to perform the work, and establishing 
performance standards. 

12/2014 REVISION:  

OPM issued revised guidance for implementing new classification standards 
which are required to be identified in this manual. Questions regarding the 
administration of the PM/C Program should be directed to OCCHCO at (202) 646-
3962. 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Table of Contents 

Foreword ......................................................................................................................... 2 

CHAPTER 1 - GENERAL INFORMATION ..................................................................... 5 

1-1.  Purpose ................................................................................................................ 5 

1-2.  Applicability and Scope ........................................................................................ 5 

1-3.  Supersession ........................................................................................................ 5 

1-4.  Authorities/References ......................................................................................... 5 

1-5.  Policy .................................................................................................................... 6 

1-6.  Definitions ............................................................................................................. 6 

1-7.  Responsibilities ..................................................................................................... 8 

1-8.  Reporting Requirements ..................................................................................... 11 

1-9.  Forms Prescribed ............................................................................................... 11 

1-10.  Questions ........................................................................................................... 11 

CHAPTER 2 - POSITION MANAGEMENT ................................................................... 12 

2-1.  General ............................................................................................................... 12 

2-2.  Policy and Principles .......................................................................................... 12 

2-3. 

Implementation ................................................................................................... 13 

CHAPTER 3 - POSITION CLASSIFICATION ............................................................... 14 

3-1.  General ............................................................................................................... 14 

3-2.  Procedures ......................................................................................................... 14 

3-3.  Position Classification Records .......................................................................... 15 

3-4.  Position Classification Review (Desk Audit or Position Review) ......................... 15 

3-5.  Annual Position Review ...................................................................................... 19 

CHAPTER 4 - POSITION DESCRIPTIONS .................................................................. 21 

4-1.  General ............................................................................................................... 21 

4-2.  Federal Wage System ........................................................................................ 21 

4-3.  PD Shortcuts ...................................................................................................... 22 

CHAPTER 5 - CAREER LADDERS ............................................................................. 26 

5-1.  Policy .................................................................................................................. 26 

5-2.  Establishing Career Ladders .............................................................................. 26 

5-3.  Documentation ................................................................................................... 26 

5-4.  Use of Career Ladders ....................................................................................... 27 

3 

 
 
5-5.  Use of Career Ladder Positions to GS-14 and GS-15 Levels ............................. 27 

CHAPTER 6 - CLASSIFICATION APPEALS ............................................................... 28 

6-1.  Purpose .............................................................................................................. 28 

6-2.  Coverage ............................................................................................................ 28 

6-3.  Process .............................................................................................................. 28 

6-4.  Appellant’s Representative ................................................................................. 28 

6-5.  Official Time........................................................................................................ 29 

6-6.  Non-appealable Issues ....................................................................................... 29 

6-7.  Appeal Decisions ................................................................................................ 30 

6-8.  Time Limits ......................................................................................................... 30 

6-9.  Documentation ................................................................................................... 31 

4 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1 - GENERAL INFORMATION 

1-1.  Purpose 

This Manual provides policy and procedures for employees, supervisors, and 
managers throughout the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) on 
position management and position classification.  

1-2.  Applicability and Scope 

This guidance pertains to the classification and management of civilian positions 
in the General Schedule (GS) and Federal Wage System (FWS) within the 
Agency. This Manual does not apply to employees appointed to positions under 
the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (Stafford 
Act), 42 U.S.C. §§ 5121 et. seq. 

1-3.  Supersession 

This Manual supersedes FEMA Instruction 3200.3, Position Management, dated 
November 4, 1986, and FEMA Instruction 3300.2, Position Classification 
Appeals, dated September 21, 1983. 

1-4.  Authorities/References 

A.  Title 5, United States Code (U.S.C.) Chapter 51, Classification.  

B.  Title 5, U.S.C. Chapter 53, Pay Rates and Systems. 

C.  Title 5, U.SC., § 2301, Merit System Principles. 

D.  Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.), Part 511, Classification under 

the General Schedule. 

E.  Title 5, C.F.R., Part 335, Promotion and Internal Placement.  

F.  Title 5, C.F.R., Part 532, Prevailing Rate Systems. 

G.  Title 5, C.F.R., Part 536, Grade and Pay Retention. 

H.  Title 5, C.F.R., Part 551, Pay Administration under the Fair Labor Standards 

Act. 

I.  Title 5, C.F.R., Part 2634, Executive Branch Financial Disclosure, Qualified 

Trusts, and Certificates of Divestiture. 

J.  U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM), “The Classifier’s Handbook”, 

dated August 1991. 

K.  OPM, General Schedule Supervisory Guide, dated June 1998. 

L.  OPM, “Handbook of Occupational Groups and Families”, dated May 2009. 

M.  OPM, “Introduction to the Federal Wage System Job Grading System”, dated 

September 1981. 

N.  OPM, “Introduction to the Position Classification Standards”, dated August 

2009. 

5 

 
O.  OPM, “Guidance For Implementing New Classification Standards”, dated May 

2006. 

P.  OPM Federal Classification and Job Grading Systems website (this guidance 

can be accessed at http://www.opm.gov/fedclass/index.asp). 

1-5.  Policy 

A.  The Chief Component Human Capital Officer has final authority and 

responsibility for all classification actions and the utilization of positions based 
on position management principles. 

B.  Standardized position descriptions (PD) for like and similar positions across 
FEMA are required in order to streamline the classification process and 
enable more rapid hiring. PDs will not be modified merely to add incidental 
duties, tasks, or reference to a local organization.  

C.  All PDs must accurately describe the work assigned to the employee. PDs 

should be concise yet clearly and completely state the major duties, 
responsibilities, and supervisory relationships. 

D.  The PD cover sheet used is the Optional Form (OF) 8. A PD is official only 

when the OF-8 contains the PD number, title, series, and grade, certification 
of PD accuracy by the supervisor/manager by means of signature, signature 
of the classification authority, and date of each.  

E.  All PDs will include the statement “Performs other duties as assigned.” In 

addition, position descriptions for all COREs and PFTs after 2012 include an 
emergency management requirement. 

F.  Vacant positions will be reviewed by program managers/supervisors before 
requesting a recruitment action. The review will include determining whether 
the duties of the position can be eliminated, assigned to other positions, or 
modified to permit classification at a lower grade. Management will certify the 
accuracy of the PD at the time of a request to fill a vacancy. 

G.  Reorganizations: Program offices shall consult with the Office of the Chief 

Component Human Capital Officer (OCCHCO) when considering a 
reorganization and before any reorganization action is implemented. 
OCCHCO provides subject matter expertise in relation to supportability of 
positions, position management advisory services, and other issues that may 
impact personnel.  

1-6.  Definitions 

A.  Accretion of Duties. An accretion of duties occurs when an employee’s 
position is classified at a higher grade because of the assignment of 
additional duties and responsibilities, job growth, or evolution of duties 
through unplanned circumstances. When the nature of a position gradually 
evolves over an extended period of time due to accretion of duties, the 
individual in the position may be promoted in place without competition. 
Instances of an accretion of duties should be very rare. 

6 

 
B.  Career Ladder Position. A position structured to allow for entry at a lower 

grade level than the full performance grade level which allows for progression 
to the full performance level. Typically, a position is announced and filled on a 
competitive basis with promotion to higher grade levels made on a non-
competitive basis. The career ladder refers to the range of grades to which 
the employee may be promoted, non-competitively, up to the classified full 
performance level of the position.   

C.  Classification. The analysis and identification of a position and placing it in a 

class under the position-classification plan established by Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM).   

D.  Classification Appeal. An employee’s request to the Office of the Chief 

Component Human Capital Officer (OCCHCO), DHS Chief Human Capital 
Officer (CHCO), or OPM to review the classification decision of the position to 
which the employee is currently assigned. 

E.  Classification Standard. A set of criteria developed and issued by OPM used 
to delineate different grade levels (as defined by law) to specific job tasks and 
work situations, thereby providing the basis for determining the appropriate 
title, occupational series, and grade for a given position. 

F.  Confidential Filer. The definition of confidential filer is the definition set forth in 

5 C.F.R. § 2634.905. 

G.  Factor Evaluation System (FES). A method of assigning grades to 

nonsupervisory General Schedule positions using nine evaluation factors 
which are assigned points for different levels.   

H.  Federal Wage System (FWS). Job grading and pay system that applies to 

employees in recognized trades or crafts, or other skilled mechanical crafts, 
or in unskilled, semiskilled, or skilled manual-labor occupations, and other 
employees including foremen and supervisors in positions having trade, craft, 
or laboring experience and knowledge as the paramount requirement. Under 
this system, pay is adjusted according to the rates paid by private industry for 
similar jobs in the same geographic area.  

I.  Full Performance Level (FPL). The highest grade level assignable to a 

particular position; the full performance level is reached when all the duties 
and responsibilities that the organization needs to be performed by a given 
position are, in fact, being accomplished with the degree of independence 
desired by management. 

J.  General Schedule (GS). Basic pay schedule established under Title 5 and 
adjusted by the President. A position is under the General Schedule if its 
primary duties require knowledge and experience in a line of work or 
discipline unrelated to trade, craft, or manual labor occupations. 

K.  Major Duties. Work assignments which represent the primary reason for a 
position’s existence and which govern qualification requirements. In most 
cases, major duties are those tasks that occupy at least 25% of an 
employee’s time. 

7 

 
L.  Pay Plan. Pay system or pay schedule under which an employee’s rate of pay 

is determined (e.g., GS, FWS). 

M.  Position. The work, consisting of the duties and responsibilities, assigned by 

competent authority for performance by an employee. 

N.  Position Audit. Sometimes referred to as a desk audit or position classification 

review is the process of examining and analyzing the duties and 
responsibilities assigned to a position for the purpose of determining the 
position’s proper pay plan, occupational series, title, and grade. 

O.  Position Description (PD). The official written description of management's 
assignment of duties, responsibilities, and supervisory relationships to a 
position.  

P.  Standard Position Description (SPD). A SPD is a standard PD that is used as 
appropriate when management’s requirements can be met most effectively by 
the establishment of a single PD covering two or more positions whose duties 
and responsibilities are basically the same, regardless of organizational 
location of the position. An SPD is used “as is” without change to describe the 
work of several positions within an organization whose duties are basically 
the same. 

Q.  Position Identification Number (PIN). A PIN is a unique alpha numeric 

identification code created by the Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO) 
to signify a position at FEMA. The position could be permanent full time 
(PFT), Not to Exceed (NTE), or a Cadre of On-Call Response/Recovery 
Employees (CORE).   

1-7.  Responsibilities 

A.  Chief Component Human Capital Officer is responsible for: 

1.  Providing policy direction and oversight for the Agency's Position 

Management and Classification (PM/C) Program; 

2.  Ensuring applicable collective bargaining agreements under pertinent 

labor relations statutes and agreements are honored; 

3.  Ensuring that FEMA employees are treated fairly and consistently, and 
without regard to any discriminatory or non-merit factor in the overall 
administration and implementation of the Agency's PM/C Program;  

4.  Ensuring that employees are provided information on FEMA’s position 

classification appeals process and their rights; 

5.  Providing final classification determinations; 

6.  Providing a determination on the utilization of positions based on position 

management principles; and 

7.  Coordinating and communicating with the DHS CHCO and OPM for 

position classifications appealed to DHS and/or OPM; and 

8 

 
8.  Applying new or updated OPM position classification standards and/or 

classification guides to covered positions within 12 months of the date of 
issuance. 

B.  Position Management and Classification Branch is responsible for: 

1.  Developing and providing PM/C program plans and program goals; 

2.  Developing and issuing PM/C program standard operating procedures and 

policy guidance and instructions; 

3.  Classifying positions and issuing PDs;  

4.  Providing prompt written notice to an employee whose position is 

reclassified to a lower grade based in whole or in part on a classification 
decision pursuant to 5 C.F.R. § 511.602. If the reclassification is due to an 
OPM classification certificate issued under 5 U.S.C. § 5110, the prompt 
written notice must also explain the reasons for the reclassification action. 
In either case, the notice shall include: (a) applicable appeal rights 
regarding the classification decision; (b) applicable time limits within which 
the employee’s appeal must be filed in order to preserve any retroactive 
benefits under 5 C.F.R. § 511.703; and (c) any other appeal or grievance 
rights available under applicable law, rule, regulation, or negotiated 
agreement. 

5.  Coordinating with OCC Ethics Division and managers and supervisors to 

identify which positions under their supervision are required to file 
confidential financial disclosure reports; and 

6.  Providing advisory and consultative services to management regarding 

the PM/C program. 

C.  Managers and Supervisors are responsible for: 

1.  Establishing positions at the lowest grade possible to effectively perform 

organizational function; 

2.  Establishing, in collaboration with OCCHCO, the proper classification of 

positions under his/her direction. The supervisor assigns the duties, which 
ultimately determine the grade of each position, and certifies that the 
position description (PD) reflects those duties. This certification is also 
made by higher level supervisory and/or managerial personnel. Thus, 
when a Human Resources (HR) classification specialist assigns a grade 
(and hence a salary level) to a position, the supervisor and manager have 
played a key role in setting the proper grade; 

3.  Establishing or recommending, and maintaining within their area of 

responsibility, an effective organizational/position structure consistent with 
approved mission, manpower authorizations, and administrative 
authorities; 

4.  Assigning specific duties, responsibilities, and authorities to positions to 
achieve optimum balance of economy, effectiveness, skill utilization, 

9 

 
employee motivation, and/or development in conformance with the 
objectives of sound position management; 

5.  Considering the impact on all other positions within the organization 

supervised/managed before assigning duties to any position that will result 
in a higher grade;   

6.  Reviewing the organizational/position structure to determine changes that 

may be appropriate to improve the organization's efficiency and 
effectiveness if any of the following characteristics are present: 

a.  There exist supervisory layering and/or supervisor employee ratios 

that are out of line with other similar work operations; 

b.  Higher level duties have been fragmented into many positions so that 
they will be graded to the higher level despite the fact that all perform 
substantial amounts of lower level work; 

c.  There are overlaps in authorities and responsibilities which generate 

needless duplication of effort; 

d.  Skills and abilities are being required which exceed those actually 

necessary to do the work; 

e.  The staffing structure inadequately recognizes human factors implicit 
in attracting, motivating, training, promoting, and maintaining an 
effective work force (e.g., a proper mix of grade levels that are 
commensurate with work assignments and qualifications required, a 
stimulating and challenging work environment, opportunity to increase 
skills and advance to higher level positions); or 

f.  Available employee possessed skills and training are not being fully 

utilized; 

7.  Advising the Office of the Chief Component Human Capital Officer as 
appropriate, and as promptly as possible, of proposed changes in the 
organizational structure and/or changes in duties assigned to positions, 
and provide charts or other material pertinent to the change; 

8.  Before any vacant position is filled, reviewing it to determine whether the 

position: 

a. 

Is essential to the operation and is properly described; 

b.  Should be reclassified based on significant changes in the duties 

assigned; 

c.  Should be filled at a developmental/training level; or 

d. 

Is incumbent-only and can only be filled at a certain level;  

9.  Assisting the Position Management and Classification Branch in the 

preparation of clearly defined position descriptions and using established 
standard PDs when feasible and certify to their accuracy whenever the 
positions are established, amended, or filled; 

10 

 
10. Certifying in writing annually on the OF-8 as to the accuracy of each 

position description for which they are accountable; 

11. Advising employees of their right to review classification standards and to 

appeal the classification of their position; 

12. As appropriate, reviewing or arranging for review by subordinates, the 
classification standards and guides issued by the Office of Personnel 
Management; 

13. Providing an opportunity to lower level supervisors, by training or other 
means, to acquire the necessary knowledge and skills to effectively 
discharge their position management and classification responsibilities; 
and 

14. Coordinating with OCC Ethics Division and OCCHCO to identify which 

positions under their supervision should be classified as confidential filers. 

D.  Employees are responsible for: 

1.  Reviewing their PD to ensure that it accurately reflects the duties they are 

performing;  

2.  Raising discrepancies between the PD and the work with their immediate 

supervisor; and  

3.  Understanding the location of their position within the organization and 

operating within the appropriate management channels. 

1-8.  Reporting Requirements 

OCCHCO will collect the appropriate information relating to position management 
and classification and report to DHS CHCO, OPM, and FEMA OCC Ethics as 
directed.  

OCCHCO will post information via the FEMA weekly regarding changes to 
classification standards. 

1-9.  Forms Prescribed 

A.  OF-8, Position Description (cover sheet) 

B.  Standard Form 52, Request for Personnel Action 

1-10.  Questions 

Questions regarding the administration of the PM/C Program should be directed 
to OCCHCO at (202) 646-3962. 

11 

 
 
 
CHAPTER 2 - POSITION MANAGEMENT 

2-1.  General 

Position management is the continuous and systematic process of assuring that 
organizations and positions are structured efficiently and economically. It is the 
series of steps that managers and supervisors follow to determine the type of 
organizational structure required to fulfill the function(s) assigned to a particular 
unit and calculate how many positions are needed and how those positions will 
relate to one another. 

2-2.  Policy and Principles 

FEMA will establish and maintain only those positions necessary to accomplish 
Agency programs in the most effective, efficient, and economical manner. In line 
with this policy, supervisors and managers will observe the following position 
management principles in determining organizational structure, developing 
staffing plans, and assigning duties to individual positions: 

A.  Establish the fewest number of positions essential to accomplish the functions 

assigned. 

B.  Structure positions to avoid overlapping of duties, unnecessary positions, or 

fragmentation of work processes. 

C.  Abolish vacant positions if the duties can be redistributed or eliminated. 

D.  Optimize supervisor/employee ratios as follows: 

1.  First-level supervisors over GS positions supervise no less than six (6) 

positions; 

2.  First-level supervisors over trades and crafts and FWS positions supervise 

no less than eight (8) positions; and 

3.  Second-level supervisors and managers (GS or FWS) have no less than 

three (3) subordinate supervisors reporting to them. 

E.  Establish official deputy positions sporadically in large, complex organizations 

of at least fifty (50) employees. 

F.  Minimize the number of organizational levels, with emphasis on 

decentralization and delegation to the lowest possible working level. 

G.  Hire at the “entry” level whenever possible to ensure a balance between 

employees who perform the full performance level duties of the unit and the 
development of employees who perform more routine and lower level tasks. 

H.  Establish positions in such a way as to encourage career development and 

allow cross training consistent with the need to recruit and retain a diversified 
work force. 

I.  Review official PDs during performance plan discussions to determine 

whether the PD is current and accurate. Document the process on Block 23 
of the OF-8. 

12 

 
2-3. 

Implementation 

OCCHCO is responsible for advising management of their responsibility to 
ensure sound position management. OCCHCO will work with supervisors and 
managers to assure that: 

A.  Positions and organizations are structured in accordance with the position 

management principles enumerated above in Section 2-2; 

B.  Each employee has a current and properly classified position description 

which adequately describes the work assigned; and 

C.  Annual staffing plans are established within the established allocations for 

salaries and benefits determined by the Office of the Chief Financial Officer 
(OCFO). 

13 

 
 
 
CHAPTER 3 - POSITION CLASSIFICATION 

3-1.  General 

Position classification is a process through which Federal positions are assigned 
to a pay system, series, title, and grade or band, based on consistent application 
of position classification standards. 

A.  Classification determinations are based on the:  

1.  Work assigned to positions by the responsible management official; 

2.  Complexity of the work; 

3.  Level of assigned responsibility; 

4.  Outcome of products and/or services; 

5.  Knowledge and skills necessary to successfully perform the assigned 

work; and 

6.  Proper application of applicable OPM position classification guidelines 

such as standards and functional guides. 

B.  A position classification standard is a set of criteria developed by OPM 

relating different grade levels (as defined by law) to specific work situations, 
thereby providing the basis for determining the appropriate title, series, and 
grade for a given position. 

C.  OCCHCO will use the position classification standards, guides, and job family 

standards tools issued by OPM when evaluating the work of positions.   

3-2.  Procedures 

A.  Administration 

The PM/C program will be administered to provide management with 
information and advice on organizations, reorganizations, and other position 
and workforce management matters. 

B.  Circumstances Requiring Position Classification Action 

Managers and supervisors have a continuing responsibility for ensuring that 
PDs are current and accurate in terms of assigned duties and responsibilities, 
and that necessary position classification action is initiated when: 

1.  A new position is established; 

2.  The principal duties and responsibilities of a position have changed 

materially; 

3.  A review of multiple positions is proposed (a group classification review 
consisting of five or more positions requires the approval of an Assistant 
or Regional Administrator or an Office Director); 

4.  A supervisory position is vacated;  

5.  A PD is over five years old;  

14 

 
6.  OPM issues a new classification standard or guide. All new OPM position 
classification standards and/or classification guides to covered positions 
must be applied within 12 months of the date of issuance. From the date 
of receipt of the new standard, no new classification action may take place 
unless the position has been described in the required format and 
classified according to the new standard. See section 3-4.G for additional 
information on the application of new and updated position classification 
standards; and 

7.  OPM issues a classification certificate (e.g., as a result of an appeal 
decision or survey finding). NOTE: Agencies shall review their own 
classification decisions for identical, similar, or related positions to insure 
consistency with a classification certificate from OPM. 

3-3.  Position Classification Records 

CCHCO is responsible for maintaining all official PDs, records, files, and other 
material incidental to the classification of positions and providing access for 
review by regulatory/reviewing entities.  

A.  Position description numbers will be assigned by OCCHCO, in accordance 

with internal operating procedures. 

B.  When new PDs are classified, an evaluation statement will be prepared which 

explains in sufficient detail the basis of the position classification. The 
evaluation statement will remain in OCCHCO as an official part of the 
position. 

C.  Supervisors and employees should review PDs, at least annually, to ensure 

that they are accurate. If a PD is no longer current and accurate, the 
supervisor should contact OCCHCO and inform the servicing HR 
Classification Specialist. The servicing HR Classification Specialist will 
determine the amount of change that has occurred in the assigned duties and 
responsibilities and advise the supervisor on the appropriate format and 
procedure for updating the PD.  

3-4.  Position Classification Review (Desk Audit or Position Review) 

A formal position audit or position review with an employee and/or the 
employee’s supervisor may be used by an HR Specialist/Classifier to gather first-
hand information about a position. It is an interview designed to highlight the key 
or major aspects of a position. Findings are then compared to the current OPM 
position classification standard(s) and other organizational materials to ensure 
that the PD accurately describes the major duties and is properly classified.  

Position audits are conducted via telephone or at the employee's workplace (on-
site audit) whenever possible. On-site audits are conducted to gain pertinent job 
observations and other information that is otherwise unattainable. An audit is 
conducted when significant changes are being proposed or have occurred to a 
position when it is determined that additional information is needed to classify the 
position, such as: mission changes, downsizing, reorganization, technological 
advances, additional duties, elimination of obsolete programs, practices and 

15 

 
requirements, etc. These and other changes can have an impact on the 
classification of the position in terms of its title, pay plan, series, and grade. 
These classification elements not only determine what salary the employee will 
be paid, but categorize the work experience he/she will gain while occupying the 
position, and specifies the qualification requirements (knowledge, skills, and 
abilities) necessary when filling the position.  

It is critical that the manager promptly advise OCCHCO of position and 
organization changes and provide information pertaining to the change (e.g., 
revised position description, revisions to staffing plans, reorganization proposals, 
identifying the position(s) that will be impacted, etc.). 

Position classification determinations require a three-step process of fact finding, 
analysis of position data, and the documentation of findings. The primary and 
most complete source of position information is the position audit and 
subsequent supervisory review. A supervisor or an employee may request a 
position audit. An employee or supervisor would request a position audit if the 
new or changed duties or responsibilities are significant and have been 
performed for a minimum of 120 days and are expected to indefinitely remain as 
regular duties. Additional information on position audits can be found on the 
OCCHCO intranet webpage, “Position Audit FAQs.” 

A.  Requesting a Position Audit 

1.  Supervisory Request for a Position Audit 

To request a formal position audit review, supervisors shall prepare, using 
their respective Division or Office internal procedures, and forward the 
position description request form, FEMA Form 252-0-1 (2/14), to 
OCCHCO specifying how the position has changed. To the extent 
possible, the request should explain the reason for the position audit 
request, cite examples of current work assignments, and specify the 
manner in which the position is supervised. The request shall be 
accompanied by an updated PD and detailed organizational chart 
identifying positions certified by management.  

2.  Employee Request for a Position Audit 

An individual employee may initiate a request for a position audit. As with 
a supervisory request for a position audit, the employee must prepare and 
submit the position description request form that explains how the position 
has changed, cite examples of typical work assignments, and describe the 
manner in which the work is supervised. A revised description of duties 
and responsibilities should also accompany the request. Although the 
employee may submit the request directly to OCCHCO, the preferred 
method is to send the request through the employee’s first-level 
supervisor and Executive Officer/Human Resources Liaison.  

B.  Processing a Position Audit Request 

Upon OCCHCO’s receipt of the position audit request, a HR Classification 
Specialist shall be assigned to review the request and determine the 

16 

 
appropriate course of action. Position audit assignments will be made based 
upon knowledge of the organization and occupation, as well as overall 
workload. The HR Classification Specialist will contact management and the 
appropriate administrative staff to acknowledge receipt of the position audit 
request and obtain any additional information, and schedule the position audit 
at a mutually convenient time.  

C.  Conducting the Position Audit 

The position audit interview is conducted via telephone or at the employee’s 
work site. The HR Specialist will meet with the first-level supervisor and the 
employee. An audit summary of major duties and responsibilities may be 
developed and provided to the supervisor and employee for review and 
concurrence if it is determined that the revised PD accompanying the audit 
request does not accurately reflect work performed.  

D.  Completing the Evaluation Statements 

The purpose of an evaluation statement is to set forth the rationale for 
position classification determinations for pay plan, title, series, and grade as 
well as credit for each factor level. The evaluation statement should include 
any information that will assist the reader in understanding the writer’s 
rationale in the decision-making process. Evaluation statements must be 
prepared and filed with the original classified PD. Evaluation statements 
should always be signed and dated by the HR Specialist/Classifier. 

A written evaluation statement will be issued to the Chief, Position 
Management and Classification Branch, OCCHCO. The evaluation statement 
shall include a determination of the title, series, and grade level of the 
position. Any extenuating circumstances that prevent the HR Specialist from 
making a title, series, and/or grade level determination shall be discussed and 
resolved with the Executive Officer/HR Liaison before the evaluation report is 
issued. Where a reclassification to a higher grade is supported, a decision as 
to whether or not the reclassified position shall be subject to competition shall 
also be indicated. Evaluation reports are pre-decisional internal OCCHCO 
working documents. 

E.  Reporting and Acting on Position Audit Findings 

The Chief, Position Management and Classification Branch will issue a 
determination of findings memorandum to the requesting employee’s first and 
second level supervisors. This memorandum will also advise of the 
employee’s right to file an official classification appeal to OCCHCO, DHS, 
and/or OPM and will provide a contact number for further information on the 
appeals process. It is the first line supervisor’s responsibility to inform the 
employee of the result of the position audit. 

Regardless of the results of the position audit, the supervisor should meet 
with the employee and provide him or her with a copy of the determination of 
findings. If the position audit findings conclude that the position supports 

17 

 
reclassification to a higher grade, the supervisor shall take immediate action 
to effect the reclassification or reassign/reallocate the work.  

If reclassification to a higher grade is supported by OCCHCO, the supervisor 
may take action to promote the incumbent (if such action is permitted under 
the Agency’s Merit Promotion Plan), advertise the higher graded position in 
accordance with the Agency’s Merit Promotion Plan, or change the title or 
series as recommended in the position audit findings. Supervisors may also 
consider workload projections and, if it is determined that work at the higher 
level is not expected to continue over the long term, the supervisor may 
assign the higher-level duties to a higher graded employee. The feasibility of 
a temporary promotion may also be explored with OCCHCO as an option to 
resolve the short-term work issue.  

An employee who is placed in a lower-graded position as a result of the 
position being reduced as a result of a reclassification is entitled to retain the 
grade held immediately before the reduction for a period of two years. An 
employee is eligible for grade retention based on a reclassification of his or 
her position only if, immediately before the reduction in grade, that position 
was classified at the existing grade or a higher grade for a continuous period 
of at least one year. 

In the unusual circumstance when a classification action results in a lower 
grade or a loss of pay and the employee is not entitled to grade and pay 
retention, an appeal decision that reverses the original classification action 
may be made retroactively. See Chapter 6.  

F.  Effective Date of Actions 

The effective date for promotion actions resulting from position audits, 
assuming that the action meets all the requirements as an exception to the 
Agency’s Merit Promotion Plan, should normally be effective no later than the 
second pay period after the decision by the supervisor. Promotion actions 
resulting from position audits are not retroactive. No entitlement exists for 
compensation at a higher grade level prior to the effective date of the 
promotion. 

G.  New OPM Classification Standards and Guides 

1.  Implementation of New Standards/Guides 

i.  All new OPM position classification standards and/or guides to covered 
positions must be applied within 12 months of the date of issuance. 
From the date of receipt of the new standard, no new classification 
action may take place unless the position has been described in the 
required format and classified according to the new standard. 

ii.  When implementing a new classification standard, FEMA will follow 

OPM guidance by: 

a.  Applying the standard to new positions and positions under 

classification appeal first. Then applying the standard to vacant 

18 

 
positions prior to initial recruitment; positions where grade change 
is likely (predicted); and standard position descriptions, if 
applicable; 

b.  Using pen-and-ink changes for minor revisions with no grade 

impact; and 

c.  Processing mass changes, as appropriate, rather than individual 

personnel actions. 

2.  Position Classification Appeals 

i. 

If an employee who encumbers a covered position files a position 
classification appeal with FEMA or OPM prior to implementing a new 
OPM standard, FEMA must immediately apply the new standard in 
order to properly adjudicate the appeal. 

ii.  In the event of a classification appeal, the implementation of a new 

standard should include ensuring that the position description is in the 
same format as the standard used to evaluate the work. 

iii.  While it is generally advisable to describe positions using the same 
format as the classification standards that cover them, outside of a 
classification appeal, it is not necessary to re-describe existing 
descriptions of properly classified positions solely for the purpose of 
changing the format to match the new standard. 

3.  Inaccurate Position Descriptions 

It is FEMA’s policy that, to the maximum extent possible, position 
descriptions are accurately maintained. However, if the program 
manager/supervisor determines that a position description(s) covered by 
the new standard is inaccurate, he or she should immediately contact 
OCCHCO for assistance in updating the position description(s) so that the 
new standard can be applied.  

3-5.  Annual Position Review 

A.  Nature of the Review 

FEMA requires that an annual review be conducted of all positions. The need 
for each position must be considered and those found to be necessary must 
be reviewed to assure that the position description is adequate and 
classification is proper. Action should be taken to make appropriate changes 
to position descriptions to reflect changes that have occurred in employee job 
assignments. These changes in duties could affect the title, series, and/or 
grade assigned to the position. 

B.  Supervisory Responsibility for Annual Review 

In conjunction with the annual performance ratings, each supervisor will 
review the current description of each authorized position (occupied or 
vacant) in his/her organization to determine if it is accurate, complete, and 
essential to effective operations. When feasible, employees will participate in 

19 

 
reviews and discussions of their positions in order to promote a full 
understanding of position requirements. 

C.  Supervisory Responsibility for Annual Certification 

Following the annual performance ratings for the rating period ending 
December 31 of each year, the rating official will certify to the currency of 
positions and initial the OF-8. The rating official will document any specific 
changes to the position description (i.e., additions, deletions, modifications) 
and provide to OCCHCO Position Management and Classification Branch. 

D.  OCCHCO Responsibility for Annual Certification 

OCCHCO, Position Management and Classification Branch, will provide any 
needed assistance to supervisors/managers during the course of the annual 
review, examine the changes to position descriptions that are submitted, take 
appropriate action to update and otherwise change any inaccurate position 
descriptions reported, and determine if a change in title, series, and/or grade 
is warranted. 

E.  Office of Personal Management and Department of Homeland Security Audits 

FEMA positions may be reviewed by representatives of the Department of 
Homeland Security and the Office of Personnel Management during periodic 
human capital accountability audits. OCCHCO will participate in these audits, 
provide any needed assistance to all concerned, and attempt to resolve any 
problems or disagreements concerning the classification of positions. All 
employees are expected to cooperate fully with audit representatives. 

20 

 
 
 
CHAPTER 4 - POSITION DESCRIPTIONS 

4-1.  General 

A position description (PD), for General Schedule (GS) positions or job 
description (JD) for Federal Wage System (FWS) jobs, is an official, written 
statement of the major duties, responsibilities, and supervisory relationship of a 
position. DHS supervisors and managers who direct the work of an 
organizational unit are responsible and accountable for organizing work in an 
efficient, effective manner, and for using resources to carry out the missions of 
their organizations in the same manner. Supervisors are to ensure that 
employees have copies of their position descriptions (PDs/JDs) and shall 
objectively, expeditiously, and fairly consider employee concerns over the 
accuracy of their PDs, and the classification of their positions. 

While the manager/supervisor is ultimately responsible for ensuring the currency 
and accuracy of an employee’s PD, who prepares the PD itself, whether it be the 
supervisor, the employee, a contractor, a HR Specialist, or someone else, is 
management’s right to decide. 

The body of the PD will, at the minimum, include the name and location of the 
organization where the position exists; percentage of time spent on the major 
duties; and will address the same specific grade level criteria factors used in the 
classification standard (s) to evaluate the position. All PFT and CORE GS-15 or 
equivalent and below PDs must meet this requirement and must include a 
statement (normally on the coversheet) signed by the supervisor attesting to the 
accuracy of the description.   

Under rare circumstances, it may be acceptable to develop and classify PDs 
based on management's best estimate of what the duties and responsibilities of a 
position will be following a reorganization or the establishment of a new program. 
PDs would be appropriately annotated to reflect their projected basis and would 
be subject to review six months after incumbency to ensure accuracy. 

4-2.  Federal Wage System 

Federal Wage System (FWS) descriptions are called Job Descriptions (JDs). The 
FWS covers work in a recognized trade or craft or other skilled mechanical craft, 
or in an unskilled, semiskilled, or skilled manual labor occupation. FWS 
employees are paid the local prevailing rate for blue collar work based upon 
annual wage surveys. Specific guidance on FWS jobs can be found in OPM’s 
Introduction to the FWS Job Grading System at 
http://opm.gov/fedclass/fwsintro.pdf, Section IV of OPM’s Introduction to the 
Position Classification Standards at http://opm.gov/fedclass/gsintro.pdf, and in 
the OPM Operating Manual Federal Wage System – Appropriated Fund, at 
http://opm.gov/oca/wage/appfund/. 

For non-supervisory jobs, the FWS employs a “whole job” evaluation method 
requiring comparison of four factors: (1) skills and knowledge required, (2) 
responsibility, (3) physical effort, (4) working conditions. Additionally, the key 
determination of FWS coverage is a position’s requirement to have trades, crafts, 

21 

 
or laboring experience and knowledge as the paramount requirement for the 
performance of its primary duty. 

The grade assigned to a FWS non-supervisory job is based upon the highest 
level of work performed on a “regular and recurring” (not majority of the time) 
basis.  

4-3.  PD Shortcuts 

A.  Major Changes. Whenever a significant change takes place in the major 
duties of a position, in the way those duties are supervised, or governing 
qualifications, the PD must be amended or rewritten and evaluated. A 
significant change means the addition or deletion of a major duty or a change 
in level of supervisory controls over the work. Any amendment to a position 
that will affect the title, series, or grade requires a new coversheet. A PD can 
only be amended twice before a complete rewrite and new PD is required. 

B.  Minor Changes. Changes in a PD that will not affect the title, series, or grade 
can usually be accommodated through minor editing. If the modification only 
involves a word or two, the change may easily be handled through a “pen and 
ink” correction. If the change involves several phrases or paragraphs, then 
the modifications may be typed on a separate page and attached to the PD. 

C.  Statement of Differences. A Statement of Differences (SoD) is a succinct 

description of the differences between the duties, responsibilities, or working 
conditions set forth in a currently established position description, and those 
of the position being described. When a position being described is 
substantially similar to an existing position in the same organizational unit and 
classified with the same series and title, it may not be necessary to draft an 
entirely new PD. In many cases, the already classified and approved PD may 
be used along with a brief SoD, attached to a completed coversheet, 
describing how the two positions differ. A SoD is particularly useful when 
management decides to fill a position at a grade level below the full 
performance level. In such a case, the PD for the new position would consist 
of the classified and approved PD for the full performance level work plus a 
completed coversheet and a statement addressing the modified expectations 
associated with the lower grade (e.g., at the lower grade level, supervision 
would normally be increased while knowledge required to perform the work 
would be decreased). A SoD may not be used to describe higher level duties 
(i.e., the grade of the already existing PD must be at or above the grade of 
the position being described), nor should it be used to describe supervisory or 
leadership positions. While use of the statement of difference is not 
mandatory, it does promote efficiency. 

D.  Developmental PDs. Position descriptions for developmental positions often 

employ the SoD approach. Developmental PDs need to be linked to the target 
PD as well as to each of the career ladder positions leading to the target 
position. At the minimum they should indicate the title, series, grade, and PD 
number of the next rung of the career ladder as well as the full performance 
level (FPL) target grade and PD number. 

22 

 
E.  Standard PDs. Standard position descriptions (also referred to as “generic” or 
“template” PDs) are available for a large number of positions. A standard PD 
is an “off the shelf” document that may be used “as is” without change to 
describe the work of several positions within an organization whose duties are 
basically the same. Since these standard documents have already been 
evaluated and classified, no further review is necessary. There is, however, 
one important exception: Standard PDs should not be used as the basis for 
an accretion unless an audit has been performed verifying the employee is 
actually performing the higher level duties and responsibilities described in 
the Standard PD and that the major duties of the position being replaced by 
the standard PD are also present in the standard PD to which the employee is 
being accreted. Contact your servicing HR Classification Specialist for further 
information on the appropriateness and availability of Standard PDs. 
Additional information on establishing position descriptions can be found on 
OCCHCO’s intranet webpage. 

F.  Coversheets. All PDs will have a signed coversheet, OF-8. The signatures 
reflect the supervisor and/or approving official authorized to establish or fill 
the position and the person authorized to classify the position. The 
coversheet should reflect the position’s current organizational location, 
associated career ladder positions, title, series grade, PD number of any 
positions replaced, and the classification standard(s) used to classify the 
position. Finally, if any of the following items are checked on the coversheet 
they must also be annotated in the Remarks Section, body of the PD, and/or 
in the evaluation statement: 

1.  Position Sensitivity and Risk level Designation. Indicate that the 

designation has been approved by the Security Office. 

2.  Testing Designated Position (TDP). Indicate that the designation has been 
approved by the Security and HR offices and that as a TDP it is subject to 
initial and random drug testing. 

3.  Coding Position Sensitivity. Determine the appropriate coding in 
accordance with OPM’s Guide to Data Standards Part A: Human 
Resources: 

a.  Not Designated. No designation of sensitivity has been made. (Not 
valid for use on Standard Forms 50 or 52, Optional Form 8, or 
equivalent agency form.)  

b.  Non-sensitive (NS) National Security Risk. Potentially prejudicial to the 
national security. Adverse impact on the efficiency of the service: 
Potential for impact involving duties of limited relation to the agency 
mission with program responsibilities that affect the efficiency of the 
service.   

Low Risk (LR) Public Trust Position. Adverse impact on the efficiency 
of the service: Potential for impact involving duties of limited relation to 

23 

 
the agency mission with program responsibilities which affect the 
efficiency of the service. 

c.  Noncritical-Sensitive (NCS) National Security Risk. Potential for 
damage to potential for serious damage to the national security. 
Adverse impact on the efficiency of the service: Potential for moderate 
to serious impact involving duties of considerable importance to the 
agency mission with significant program responsibilities that affect the 
efficiency of the service.  

d.  Critical-Sensitive (CS) National Security Risk. Potential for 

exceptionally grave damage to the national security. Adverse impact 
on the efficiency of the service: Potential for exceptionally grave impact 
involving duties of clearly major importance to the agency mission with 
major program responsibilities that affect the efficiency of the service. 
Normally also a TDP. 

e.  Special-Sensitive (SS) National Security Risk. Potential for inestimable 
damage to the national security. Adverse impact on the efficiency of 
the service: Potential for inestimable impact involving duties especially 
critical to the agency mission with broad scope and authority (e.g., 
overall direction of a major Government program) or other extremely 
important responsibilities that affect the overall efficiency of the 
service. Normally a TDP. 

f.  Moderate Risk (MR) Public Trust Position. Adverse impact on the 
efficiency of the service: Potential for moderate to serious impact 
involving duties of considerable importance to the agency or program 
mission with significant program responsibilities and delivery of 
customer services to the public.  

g.  High Risk (HR) Public Trust Position. Adverse impact on the efficiency 
of the service: Potential for exceptionally serious impact involving 
duties especially critical to the agency or a program mission with broad 
scope of policy or program authority. 

h.  Emergency positions. If the position has been designated as Mission 

Critical (MC) in an event of an emergency, natural, or man-made crisis, 
it should be so reflected on the coversheet and in the body of the PD. 

4.  The PD must include whether the position requires the employee to file a 

confidential financial disclosure report. 

G.  Titling Practices. The purpose of a position title is to communicate an 

immediate understanding and identification of the job. Classifiers will title 
position with Section H of OPM’s Introduction to the Position Classification 
Standards and applicable classification standards. Titles assigned by the 
classifier and annotated on the coversheet are designated the official title for 
pay and other personnel purposes. The requirement to use official titles 
however does not preclude supervisors from using unofficial titles for other 
purposes (e.g., organizational charts, telephone directories, business cards, 

24 

 
meetings, conferences, etc.). Organizational and functional titles do not 
replace, but complement official position titles.  

H.  Constructed titles. Supervisors may designate the official title of positions in 
occupational series for which OPM has not prescribed titles, e.g., the GS-
0301, GS-0340, GS-0501 series. They may use any basic position title that 
describes the work of the position; however, they may not use as a basic 
position title any title OPM has prescribed for another series. 

I.  Parenthetical titles. For some occupational series (e.g., 0201, 2210), OPM 
has prescribed certain parenthetical titles to be used as appropriate for 
positions in those series. Only those designations may be used. OCCHCO 
may supplement the official OPM title with parenthetical designations when it 
is determined that the parenthetical title would add materially to the 
understanding and identification of the position and when the duties and 
qualifications reflected in the parenthetical title are clearly apparent in the 
position description itself. 

J.  Student Trainee. (XX99 series) are to be titled Student Trainee followed by 
the parenthetical title consistent with the occupation (e.g., Student Trainee 
(Administration), GS-0399-04 for a Management Analyst student trainee). 

K.  Abbreviations. For consistency and ease of gathering and sorting report data, 
DHS classifiers are encouraged to use the abbreviations listed in APPENDIX 
1 in their titling practices. 

L.  Collateral Duties. A PD may have collateral duties that are unrelated to the 

primary purpose of the position. Collateral duties generally take only a small 
percent of the employee's time (never more than 50%) and cannot (by 
definition) affect the classification of the position. Collateral duties must be 
described including time percentage spent on the duties. The duty statement 
should be documented and dated. A typical collateral duty assignment would 
be an Employee Assistance Program Coordinator. 

25 

 
 
 
5-1.  Policy 

CHAPTER 5 - CAREER LADDERS 

This chapter contains the proper and improper uses of career ladder positions. It 
also provides prohibitive policy for the use of career ladder positions to the GS-
14 and GS-15 level. Where this policy conflicts with existing negotiated 
agreements, including applicable Merit Promotion Plans, the agreement takes 
precedence over this instruction for covered employees. 

5-2.  Establishing Career Ladders 

Establishing career ladder positions can optimize efficiency, productivity, and 
organizational effectiveness by broadening the pool of applicants when filling 
vacant positions; enhancing employee motivation and job satisfaction through 
planned employee development; reducing time to process promotions and 
administrative costs by providing non-competitive advancement within the career 
ladder; enhancing workforce retention by providing internal career opportunities; 
and lowering average human capital costs by including a range of pay levels. A 
career ladder is established based upon a classification analysis that sufficient 
work exists for all employees on a regular and recurring basis at the full 
performance level to support the grade. 

Program Offices must consider the following factors when deciding to establish a 
career ladder for a position: 

1.  Size of Applicant Pool. Career ladders are a useful tool when recruitment for 
the position is difficult at higher grade levels. Recruiting at lower grade levels 
can broaden the applicant pool. 

2.  Availability of Training Staff. Career ladders should only be established when 

there is available senior staff with the breadth and scope of technical 
knowledge necessary to train the incumbent.  

3.  Uniqueness of Duties. If a position requires unique, specialized qualifications 
where there is no staff available or knowledgeable to train or develop the 
incumbent, a career ladder will not be established. 

4.  Risk Management. For a position where anything less than full performance 

would put FEMA at risk, a career ladder will not be established. 

5.  Supervisory Status. Career ladders will not be established for supervisory 

positions. 

6.  Grade Level. Positions graded above the GS-13 level will not be established 
as career ladders. Rare exceptions may be made to this rule with justification 
and prior approval from the Deputy Administrator and Chief Component 
Human Capital Officer. 

5-3.  Documentation 

All requests to establish and fill career ladder positions at any grade level must 
include the appropriate documentation, to include: 

26 

 
1.  A signed OF-8 from the position’s supervisor; 

2.  A Position Description (PD) or Statement of Differences for each intervening 

level in the career ladder that refers to the full performance PD; 

3.  Appropriate job analysis relevant to each of the grade levels. Job 

requirements for trainee grade levels are normally not the same as for full 
performance grade levels; and 

4.  Appropriate criteria (e.g. questions for the automated recruitment system) that 

aligns with the job analysis. 

5-4.  Use of Career Ladders 

If a career ladder position is established and filled, supervisors/managers should: 

1.  Provide employees increasingly difficult assignments and training to prepare 

them for the next higher grade; 

2.  Monitor training progress continuously to enable subsequent promotions in a 

timely manner; 

3.  Clearly communicate to applicants the normal expected span of time between 
subsequent promotions subject to successful performance, especially if that 
time frame exceeds one year between grade levels; 

4.  Ensure funding plans accommodate subsequent promotions of employees 

selected below the full performance level; 

5.  Promote employees who demonstrate the ability to successfully perform the 

next higher level duties and responsibilities in the career ladder in accordance 
with the specific training agreement or collective bargaining agreements; and 

6.  Provide remedial assistance to employees who are not ready for promotion to 

enhance their performance and future success. 

5-5.  Use of Career Ladder Positions to GS-14 and GS-15 Levels 

It is generally prohibited for Program Offices to establish and fill career ladder 
positions at any grade level with promotion potential to the GS-14 and GS-15 
levels, except with approval from the Deputy Administrator or Chief Component 
Human Capital Officer.  

Positions at the GS-14 and GS-15 level require a unique combination of 
technical, managerial, and leadership skills. It is difficult to accurately predict 
success of any individual for the full performance GS-14 or GS-15 grade level 
who has not yet performed at the next lower grade for the target position.  

Establishing grade levels of high graded positions requires considerable 
justification. Program Offices able to employ a lower graded employee in a higher 
graded position (PIN) are less likely to be able to support that requirement. 

27 

 
 
 
CHAPTER 6 - CLASSIFICATION APPEALS 

6-1.  Purpose 

This chapter contains the policy and procedures regarding position classification 
appeals. GS employees may choose to appeal to OCCHCO or DHS CHCO 
instead of or before appealing to OPM. FWS employees may appeal to 
OCCHCO, but must appeal to DHS CHCO before continuing an appeal to OPM. 
OCCHCO and the Office of Equal Rights (OER) shall ensure that employees are 
free from intimidation, restraint, interference, coercion, harassment, 
discrimination, or reprisal in pursuing their appeals. 

6-2.  Coverage 

All GS employees in grades GS-1 through 15 and all FWS employees have the 
right to appeal the classification of their positions, including the pay plan, series, 
grade, and the inclusion under or exclusion from Chapter 51 of Title 5, U.S.C. of 
the official position by the Agency or OPM.   

6-3.  Process 

The levels in the appeal process are:  

•  OCCHCO  

•  DHS CHCO 

•  OPM. 

It is the employee's prerogative to appeal either through successively higher 
levels in a series of appeals, or directly to DHS CHCO or OPM. 

NOTE: Appealing directly to a higher organizational level (for example, OPM) 
precludes a later appeal to a lower organizational level. OPM decisions are 
binding on the Agency. 

The Agency or PM/C Program will notify promptly in writing an employee whose 
position is reclassified to a lower grade based in whole or in part on a 
classification decision pursuant to 5 C.F.R. § 511.602. See Section 1-7.B.4. 
above.    

6-4.  Appellant’s Representative 

1.  When preparing and presenting a classification appeal, an employee has the 
right to be represented and advised by a person of his or her own choosing, 
except that FEMA shall have the right to disallow the employee's choice 
when: 

a.  The representative selected is another FEMA or DHS employee and the 

choice of that employee conflicts with the priority needs of the 
Government or would result in unreasonable costs to the Government; or 

b.  The representative selected represents a conflict of interest or conflict of 

position, or the appearance of such conflict (e.g., the proposed 
representative is in the management chain over the position, or the 

28 

 
proposed representative exercises classification authority for the appealed 
position or others in the organization). 

2.  When the Agency disallows an employee's selected representative, the 

Agency will notify the employee in writing and explain the reason(s) within 15 
business days.  

6-5.  Official Time 

Employees are entitled to a reasonable amount of official time to prepare for and 
present a position classification appeal. Under most circumstances, this time 
should amount to eight or fewer hours. However, supervisors and managers are 
expected to use judgment and discretion in granting employee requests of official 
time for this purpose; more than eight hours may be appropriate on rare 
occasions. 

If an employee's representative is a FEMA or DHS employee, the representative 
is also entitled to eight or fewer hours of official time for the same purpose.  

6-6.  Non-appealable Issues 

Employees may not appeal the following issues in a position classification 
appeal:  

A.  Actions taken by authorized management officials to add to, delete from, or 

otherwise change the duties and responsibilities of a PD. Inclusion or 
exclusion of a major duty in the official PD or the accuracy of the PD is non-
appealable. (Note: 5 C.F.R. § 511.607(a)(1) provides that where, in the 
course of a proper classification appeal to OPM, management and the 
employee cannot agree on the accuracy of the PD, OPM will decide the 
appeal based upon the actual duties and responsibilities assigned by 
management and performed by the employee.) 

B.  The accuracy, consistency, or use of supplemental classification guides. 

C.  The title of the position, unless a specific title is authorized in a published 

OPM position classification standard or guide, or the title reflects a 
qualification requirement or authorized area of specialization. 

D.  The classification of a position to which the employee is not officially assigned 

by an official personnel action, including a detail or assignment to duties 
outside the scope of the normally performed duties specified in the official 
position description. 

E.  The pay system, series, or grade of a position to which the employee is 

detailed or temporarily promoted. However, an employee serving under a 
time-limited promotion of two years or more may appeal the position's 
classification. 

F.  A proposed classification decision not yet made effective by an official 

personnel action. 

G.  The adequacy of the classification criteria in any OPM published classification 

guide or standard. 

29 

 
H.  An appellate classification decision issued in the form of a certificate by OPM 
as a result of an employee appeal, when there has been no change in the 
applicable classification standard(s) or guide(s), or in the major duties and 
responsibilities assigned the position. 

I.  The classification of an employee's position based on position-to-position 

comparisons and not criteria in classification standards. 

J.  A rate of pay or the propriety of a wage schedule rate. 

K.  Any other issues, not specifically mentioned above, which are excluded from 

appeal under applicable legal authorities, including OPM regulations. 

Issues that are not permitted to be heard through a position classification appeal 
may be addressed through the Agency's administrative grievance procedures or 
through the applicable negotiated grievance process, as appropriate. 

6-7.  Appeal Decisions 

An appeal decision from OPM which specifies the correct title (if one is 
prescribed), series, grade, and/or pay system of a position is a classification 
certificate. A classification certificate is binding on all administrative, certifying, 
payroll, disbursing, and accounting officials of the Government. It may or may not 
require an official personnel action. If a personnel action is required as a result of 
the classification certificate, such personnel action must be implemented within 
the time frame specified by the decision. Appeal decisions rendered by the DHS 
CHCO are binding on FEMA in the same manner as OPM decisions are binding 
on DHS. 

6-8.  Time Limits 

Generally, an employee may submit a classification appeal of his or her official 
position at any time.  

If an employee is appealing an Agency decision or an OPM classification 
certificate issued under 5 U.S.C. § 5103 or 5110, the employee must promptly 
appeal if he or she disagrees with the decision or classification certificate. Under 
these circumstances, an appeal is considered to be prompt if it is initiated within 
15 calendar days of receipt of an Agency decision or an OPM classification 
certificate, unless good cause is shown.   

In order to preserve the right to a retroactive adjustment to a classification action 
which resulted in a loss of grade or pay, the employee must file the initial request 
for review to the Agency or OPM not later than within 15 calendar days after the 
effective date of the reclassification action. Subsequent appeals from an agency 
or OPM classification decision must be filed not later than 15 calendar days 
following receipt of written notification of a final agency administrative decision or 
15 calendar days after the effective date of the action taken as a result of the 
classification decision, whichever is later.  

30 

 
 
When an employee requests reconsideration of an OPM appeal decision, he or 
she must do so in writing to OPM and must file the request to OPM no more than 
45 calendar days after the decision was issued.  

6-9.  Documentation 

1.  Appeals to OCCHCO or the DHS CHCO 

A.  Appeals to OCCHCO or the DHS CHCO must be submitted in writing and 

include the following information: 

1.  Employee's name, mailing address, and office telephone number; 

2.  Name, address, and telephone number of the employee's designated 

representative, if one has been selected; 

3.  Exact location of the position within the Agency, including the name of 

the Program Office and all subordinate organizations; 

4.  Current title, series, and grade of the position; 

5.  Requested title, series, and grade, or other classification action 

desired; 

6.  A copy of the official PD and a statement from the employee that the 
PD is accurate and complete (if not accurate and complete, include a 
statement describing what has been done to change or update the 
PD); 

7.  A statement of reasons why the employee believes the position is 

erroneously classified, including any references to position 
classification standards in support; and 

8.  A statement that the employee has no other classification appeals 

pending. 

B.  OCCHCO or the DHS CHCO will notify the employee in writing when a 

position classification appeal is accepted by the Agency or DHS. 

C.  The FEMA OCCHCO or DHS CHCO will notify program office/ 

components in writing when a position classification appeal to the 
Agency/Department is accepted from an employee, and office/ 
components will be requested to provide pertinent information about the 
position at issue. 

D.  An employee may cancel his or her position classification appeal before a 
decision is issued, but must do so in writing. The Agency/Department will 
provide written acknowledgment of the cancellation to the employee and 
to the program office/component. 

E.  An appeal decision from the Agency/Department will be issued in writing 
as a classification certificate, and will be based on the written record. The 
certificate will inform the employee of the reasons for the decision, 
including reference to the appropriate OPM classification standard(s) or 

31 

 
guide(s); will explain any further appeal rights; and will specify the action 
to be taken and the effective date for any change in the classification. 

F.  OCCHCO will maintain all records associated with classification appeals 
to OCCHCO, in accordance with agency and regulatory record keeping 
procedures. 

2.  Appeals to OPM 

Classification appeals submitted directly to OPM must follow the prescribed 
format and include the required information, as specified in the Introduction to 
the Position Classification Standards. This information is also included in the 
OPM Position Classification Appeals: Employee Fact Sheet. 

32 

 
FEDERAL EMERGENCY 
MANAGEMENT AGENCY 

INSTRUCTION 

Date 
  October 1, 2002 

   Number 

  3100.5  

          AR-HR   

Recruitment and Relocation Bonuses, Retention Allowances, 
and Student Loan Repayments 

1.  Purpose.  This instruction establishes the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s 
(FEMA’s) policy and plan for the use and payment of recruitment and relocation bonuses, 
retention allowances, and student loan repayments necessary to attract highly qualified 
applicants or retain highly qualified employees in positions that would otherwise be 
difficult-to-fill. 

2.  Applicability and Scope.  Positions and types of appointments to which these  
incentives apply are outlined below.  

 a.  Covered Positions.  

  (1)  Individuals appointed to general schedule, prevailing rate (wage), senior-level 

and scientific or professional, senior executive service, executive schedule, and law 
enforcement positions, and positions filled by Presidential appointment (except the head of 
an agency) are eligible for recruitment and relocation bonuses and retention allowances.    

            (2)  Individuals appointed to any position except one that is excepted from the 
competitive service because of its confidential, policy-determining, policy-making, or 
policy-advocating character (e.g., Schedule C, Presidential appointment with Senate 
confirmation (PAS), Non-Career Senior Executive Service) are eligible for student loan 
repayments.  

(3)  OPM may approve other categories upon written request from the head of the 

employing agency. 

b.  Qualifying Appointments.  

(1)  Recruitment and Relocation Bonuses and Retention Allowances.  Individuals 

appointed to or occupying a temporary, term, or nontemporary appointment in the 
competitive or excepted service are eligible for the incentives provided the appointment 
equals or exceeds the length of the service agreement required for the bonus amount. 

Distribution:  C(HqBrChiefs), H(FldBrChiefs), and http://cio.fema.net/rm/dm/current.html

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
October 1, 2002 

FEMA Instruction 3100.5 

(2) Student Loan Repayments.  Individuals appointed to or occupying a term or 

nontemporary appointment in the competitive or excepted service are eligible for this 
incentive provided the appointment equals or exceeds the length of the service agreement 
required for the bonus amount.  Individuals appointed to or occupying a temporary 
appointment in the competitive or excepted service are only eligible if they are serving on 
an appointment leading to conversion to a term or permanent appointment (career or career 
conditional) such as the 30% Disabled Veterans Hiring Authority. 

3.  Authorities.  

a.  Title 5 United States Code (U.S.C.) section 5753 (5 U.S.C. 5753) and Title 5 Code 

of Federal Regulations (5 CFR), Part 575, Subpart A and B, Recruitment and Relocation 
Bonuses;  

b.  5 U.S.C. 5754 and 5 CFR, Part 575, Subpart C, Retention Allowances; 

c.  5 U.S.C. 5379, Student Loan Repayments, as amended by the Floyd D. Spence 
National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2001, and 5 CFR, Part 537, Repayment 
of Student Loans. 

4.  Policy.  FEMA shall ensure fair and consistent application of the procedures outlined 
in this instruction.  Incentives will only be used when it is necessary to attract or retain 
highly qualified applicants or employees in difficult-to-fill positions.  We will take into 
consideration the need to maintain a balanced workforce in which women and members of 
racial and ethnic minority groups are appropriately represented in Government service and 
will adhere to merit system principles. 

5.  Responsibilities.  All responsible parties will ensure fair and consistent application of 
the procedures outlined in this instruction.     

a.  The FEMA Director or a designee shall approve or disapprove payment of 
recruitment and relocation bonuses, payment or recertifications for retention allowances, 
and repayment of student loans.   

b.  Assistant Directors, Administrators, Regional Directors, General Counsel, Inspector 

General, Chief Financial Officer, and Office Directors shall review written recommen-
dations, within their respective area, for payment of incentives or recertifications for 
retention allowances and, if warranted, forward recommendations and concurrences to the 
FEMA Director through the Chief Financial Officer and the Director, Human Resources 
Division. 

c.  Immediate supervisors shall make written recommendations for recruitment and 
relocation bonuses, payment of retention allowances, and student loan repayments and 
review annually each approved retention allowance to determine if it is still warranted.   
They will notify the Human Resources Division of any pending separation or termination of 
an employee currently serving under a service agreement.     

2

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
FEMA Instruction 3100.5 

October 1, 2002

d.  The Chief Financial Officer shall certify the availability of funds in support of the  

incentives. 

e.  The Director, Human Resources Division shall determine policy and provide overall  

technical guidance and direction in monitoring and evaluating the process to ensure 
regulatory compliance.  He or she shall review all requests for use of the incentives covered 
in this instruction and provide recommendations to the FEMA Director for approval or 
disapproval.  

6.    Definitions of Terms.  The terms used in this instruction are defined at attachment A.   

7.  Procedures.   

a.  An organization may recommend payment of a recruitment bonus, a relocation  
bonus or a retention allowance of up to 25 percent of basic pay or recommend repayment of 
all or part of any outstanding federally insured student loan or loans previously taken out, 
subject to the maximum limit of $6,000 per calendar year and a total of $40,000 overall per 
employee.  The incentives will be used to recruit or retain highly qualified candidates or 
employees provided there is a determination that, without an incentive, filling the position 
will be difficult. 

       b.   Incentives are funded from a central budget established specifically for payment of 
recruitment and relocation bonuses, retention allowances, and student loan repayments and 
are monitored by the Chief Financial Officer.   

       c.   An incentive will not be authorized if, when added to the employee’s estimated 
aggregate pay compensation, it exceeds the rate payable for level I of the Executive 
Schedule at the end of the calendar year.  The recruitment and relocation bonuses and 
retention allowances are not considered part of base pay for any purpose.   

      d.   The requesting organization, in coordination with the Human Resources Division, 
must determine in writing that, in the absence of such an incentive, difficulty will be 
encountered in either attracting highly qualified candidates or retaining the services of 
highly qualified employees.  The Human Resources Division will provide overall technical 
guidance and supporting recruitment or retention statistics, where available.  

e.  Once it is determined an incentive will be requested, the organization will submit a  

Standard Form (SF) 52, Request for Personnel Action, along with FEMA Form 30-67, 
Request for Incentive Pay, including any supporting documentation, if appropriate, to the 
recommending official identified in paragraph 5b.   Item 1 of the SF-52 will be annotated 
with the appropriate incentive, including the amount of incentive (recruitment bonus, 
relocation bonus, retention allowance, or student loan repayment).  In the case of retention 
allowances, include the not to exceed period (e.g., NTE l year).   The entire package will 
then be forwarded through the Chief Financial Officer, for certification of funds and to the 
Human Resources Division, for review and appropriate action.  

  3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
October 1, 2002 

FEMA Instruction 3100.5 

8. 

 Criteria for Approval and Payment.  

        a.   Recruitment Bonus.   

              (1)   The requesting organization, in coordination with the Human Resources 
Division, must determine in writing that, without such a bonus, filling the position will be 
difficult.  A recruitment bonus may be paid to an individual who is “newly appointed” to 
the Federal Government, including an appointment following a break in service of at least 
90 days.  A recruitment bonus may also be paid to an individual not yet employed who has 
received a written offer of employment and signed the FEMA Form 30-68, Bonus Service 
Agreement.  The following factors will be considered, documented, and approved before 
the individual enters on duty:  

(a)  The success of recent efforts to recruit candidates for similar positions,  

including indicators such as offer acceptance rates, the proportion of positions filled, and 
the length of time to fill positions;   

(b) Recent turnover in similar positions;  

   (c)  Labor-market factors that may affect the ability to recruit candidates for 

similar positions;  

   (d) Special qualifications needed in the position;  

               (e)  The practicality of using the superior qualifications appointment 

authority alone or in combination with the recruitment bonus.  

(2)   The bonus shall be calculated as a percentage of the employee’s starting  

annual rate of basic pay (excluding locality pay) and paid as a lump sum.  The amount of 
the recruitment bonus should be the minimum amount needed to attract the candidate.  
When determining the amount of the bonus, the factors listed in paragraph 8a(1) will be 
given consideration, to the extent that they apply, along with the following criteria: 

         (a)  The need for the candidate’s services.  How essential is it to hire this 

candidate?  What are the qualifications of this candidate and how difficult will it be to find 
and hire another candidate of equal qualifications?  What would be the impact of not filling 
this position with a high-quality candidate?  

                        (b) The need for the recruitment bonus to attract the candidate.  How large a 
bonus would it take to attract the candidate?  For example, what other salary offers has he 
or she received?  What is the prevailing private sector salary for the occupation?  

         (c)  The Agency’s ability to pay the bonus.  How large a bonus can be 

supported?    

4

 
 
      
 
 
    
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
            
 
FEMA Instruction 3100.5 

b.  Relocation Bonus. 

October 1, 2002

           (1)  A relocation bonus is appropriate when the employee relocates to accept a     
position in a different commuting area. A relocation bonus may NOT be paid until the 
employee establishes a residence in the new commuting area. The employing organization, 
in coordination with the Human Resources Division, must determine in writing that, 
without such a bonus, filling the position will be difficult.  The following factors will be 
considered, documented, and approved before the employee enters on duty in the position 
to which relocated: 

                  (a)  The success of recent efforts to recruit candidates for similar positions  
including indicators such as offer acceptance rates, the proportion of positions filled, and 
the length of time to fill positions; 

                  (b)  Recent turnover in similar positions;  

                  (c)  Labor-market factors that may affect the ability to attract candidates for 
similar positions;  

                  (d)  Special qualifications needed in the position. 

            (2)  The bonus shall be calculated as a percentage of the employee’s initial annual  
rate of basic pay (excluding locality pay) for the new position and paid as a lump sum.  The 
amount of the relocation bonus should be the minimum amount needed to attract the 
employee, considering the factors listed in paragraph 8b(1) and the Agency’s ability to pay 
the bonus.   

            (3)  The payment of a relocation bonus has no effect on an employee’s entitlement 
to reimbursement of relocation expenses, if authorized, under the Federal Travel 
Regulation.  An employee may receive authorization for a relocation bonus and not be 
authorized relocation benefits associated with a permanent change of station move. 

c.   Retention Allowance.    

      (1)  A retention allowance may be authorized if an employee is likely to leave the 
Federal service for any reason.  The employee must have received a bona-fide job offer,  
in writing, or must have submitted his or her resignation or retirement paperwork prior to 
authorization.  The allowance may not be authorized to an employee who is likely to leave 
his or her position for employment in the executive, legislative, or judicial branch of the 
Federal Government, whether in the same or a different agency.  

           (2)  The employing organization, in coordination with the Human Resources 
Division, must make a written determination that the unusually high or unique 
qualifications of the employee or a special need for the employee’s services makes it 
essential to retain the employee.  The decision must address the extent to which the 
employee’s departure would affect the Agency’s ability to carry out an activity or perform a 
function that is essential to the Agency’s mission.  It should also address the Agency’s  

  5 

 
 
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
October 1, 2002 

FEMA Instruction 3100.5 

recent efforts to recruit candidates with similar qualifications and the availability of 
candidates in the labor market, as applicable.  

          (3)   A retention allowance shall be calculated as a percentage of the employee’s rate 
of basic pay (excluding locality pay) not to exceed 25 percent.  It is paid at the same time as 
the employee’s regular paycheck.  The amount of the allowance will be based on the 
Agency’s need for the unique qualifications of the employee that make it essential to retain 
their services.  

    (4)   Payment for a retention allowance may not begin during any period of 

employment required by a recruitment bonus or relocation service agreement.  However, a 
relocation bonus may be paid to an employee already receiving a retention allowance.   

          (5)   Retention allowances may be granted in increments not to exceed 1 year and 
may be extended, if warranted.   

                  (a)  The Human Resources Division and the employing organization must 
review each retention allowance annually to determine whether payment is still warranted.  
The allowance may be reduced or terminated for budget considerations or if the conditions 
that warranted the allowance have been reduced or no longer exist (i.e., qualified candidates 
are available to fill the Agency’s special need).  

                  (b)  The employing organization must submit a written statement to the Human 
Resources Division, signed by the recommending official, to continue, reduce or terminate 
the retention allowance.  The statement must include the employee’s name, pay plan, series, 
grade, position title, and duty station; the action being requested (i.e., continue, reduce, or 
terminate); if a reduction, the amount approved; and reason(s) for continuing, reducing or 
terminating the allowance.  In addition, the employing organization must submit a SF-52, 
signed by the approving official.  The entire package must be submitted through the 
Financial and Acquisition Management Division, for certification of funds, to the Human 
Resources Division, for review and appropriate action.  Item 1 of the SF-52 will reflect  
whether the allowance is to be continued, reduced or terminated.  If continued or reduced, 
the percentage must be reflected.           

d.  Student Loan Repayment.   

  (1)  Loan repayments may be made to recruit highly qualified candidates or retain 
highly qualified employees based on a written determination that in the absence of offering 
the benefits, the Agency would encounter difficulty in filling the position with a highly 
qualified candidate or in retaining a highly qualified employee in the position.  This 
incentive may be used in conjunction with the recruitment bonus, the relocation bonus, or 
the retention allowance.  

       (2)  The maximum limit for loan repayment will be $6,000 per calendar year 
and a total of $40,000 overall per employee.  The size of the loan repayment(s) will be 
determined by the candidate’s or employee’s value to the Agency and how far in advance  

6

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
FEMA Instruction 3100.5 

October 1, 2002

funds can be committed.  The criteria in 8d(6)(7), as applicable, will be applied when 
establishing the amount of repayment(s).  The employee will be responsible for making 
loan repayment(s) on the portion of the loan that continues to be his or her responsibility.  
Payments may be applied only to the indebtedness outstanding at the time the Agency and 
the employee enter into an agreement.   

   (3)  Payments will be at the discretion of the Agency and will be subject to the   

terms, limitations, or conditions mutually agreed to in writing by the Agency and employee.  
The employee is responsible for any income tax obligations resulting from the loan 
repayment benefit.  The payments do not have to be in a lump sum.  They can be made at 
periodic intervals throughout the fiscal year.  FEMA will deduct the amount of taxes to be 
withheld from the loan repayment benefit before issuing payment to the holder of the loan.    

   (4)  Before authorizing loan repayments, the Human Resources Division or the 
requesting organization must verify with the holder of the loan that the employee has an 
outstanding student loan that qualifies for repayment under this policy.  The remaining 
balances should be verified to ensure that loans are not overpaid.  The loan repayment 
cannot exceed the limits set forth in paragraph 8d(2).   

   (5)  There are only certain types of loans that qualify as eligible for this incentive.  
The repayment authority is limited to student loans authorized by the Higher Education Act 
of 1965 and the Public Health Service Act.  These are federally insured loans made by 
educational institutions or banks and other private lenders.  

(a)  The Higher Education Act covers three families of guaranteed student 

loans: 

(i)   Federal Family Education Loans (FFEL).   

a.   Subsidized Federal Stafford Loans;  

b.  Unsubsidized Federal Stafford Loans;  

c.   Federal Plus Loans; and, 

d.  Federal Consolidation Loans. 

(ii)  William D. Ford Direct Loan Program (Direct Loans).   

   a.   Direct Subsidized Stafford Loans; 

   b.  Direct Unsubsidized Stafford Loans;  

   c.  Direct PLUS Loans; 

     d.  Direct Subsidized Consolidation Loans; and, 

  7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
October 1, 2002 

FEMA Instruction 3100.5 

   e.   Direct Unsubsidized Consolidation Loans. 

(iii)   Federal Perkins Loan Program.  

     a.   National Defense Student Loans (made before July 1, 1972);  

 b.
and July 1, 1987); and,  

   National Direct Student Loans (made between July 1, 1972  

 c.    Perkins Loans (made after July 1, 1987). 

(b) Loans covered under the Public Health Service Act. 

(i)  Loans for Disadvantaged Students (LDS);  

(ii)  Primary Care Loans (PCL);  

(iii)  Nursing Student Loans (NSL); 

                           (iv)   Health Profession Student Loans (HPSL); and, 

                           (v)    Health Education Assistance Loans (HEAL).  

            (6)   When used as a recruitment tool, the following factors will be considered, 
documented, and approved before the individual enters on duty:   

                     (a)  Success of recent efforts to recruit candidates for similar positions, 
including indicators such as offer acceptance rates, the proportion of positions filled, and 
the length of time to fill positions;  

                    (b)  Recent turnover in similar positions;  

(c)  Labor-market factors that may affect the ability to recruit candidates for  

similar positions; 

(d)  Special qualifications needed in the position;  

  (e)  In determining the amount of the repayment, subject to the limits in  

paragraph 8d(2), consideration should be given to factors such as the severity of the 
recruiting efforts, the criticality of the position, and the effect on the Agency’s mission if it 
is not filled or if there is further delay in the filling of the position.  

(7)  When used as a retention tool, the following factors will be considered, 
documented, and approved before the employee is authorized to receive any repayment of a 
federally insured student loan: 

8

 
 
    
 
                      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FEMA Instruction 3100.5 

October 1, 2002

         (a)  The employee must have received a bona-fide job offer, in writing, or  

have submitted his or her resignation or retirement paperwork prior to authorization. 

      (b)  The employing organization, in coordination with the Human Resources 

Division, must make a written determination that the unusually high or unique 
qualifications of the employee or a special need for the employee’s services makes it 
essential to retain the employee, and that, in the absence of offering the repayment benefit, 
the employee would be likely to leave for employment outside the Federal service.  The 
decision must address the extent to which the employee’s departure would affect the 
Agency’s ability to carry out an activity or perform a function that is essential to the 
Agency’s mission.  It should also address the Agency’s recent efforts to recruit candidates 
with similar qualifications and the availability of candidates in the labor market, as 
applicable.  

                    (c)  The amount of the repayment, subject to the limits in paragraph 8d(2), 
should be based on factors such as the criticality of the loss of the employee to the 
Agency’s mission, the reason(s) that a lesser amount would not be sufficient to retain the 
employee, and any other factor(s) deemed appropriate to retaining the services of the 
employee. 

9.    Service  Agreements.   Before  any  recruitment  or  relocation  bonus  or  student  loan 
repayment  may  be  made,  the  candidate  or  employee  must  sign  a  written  agreement  to 
complete  a  specified  period  of  time  with  FEMA  (use  FEMA  Form  30-68,  Bonus  Service 
Agreement, when authorizing a recruitment or a relocation bonus and FEMA Form 30-69, 
Student Loan Repayment Service Agreement, when authorizing a student loan repayment). 

a.  Recruitment and relocation bonuses of 15 percent or less require the individual  
to sign a 12-month service agreement and a 24-month service agreement if the bonus is 
more than 15 percent.  The period of service begins when the payment is made to the 
candidate or employee.  In the case of a recruitment bonus paid to an individual not yet 
employed who has signed a written service agreement, the period of service begins when 
the individual enters on duty.  An employee who voluntarily terminates employment with 
the organization before fulfilling the period of the service agreement is indebted to the  
government for a pro rata share of the recruitment or relocation bonus.  A pro rata share of 
the bonus shall be recovered as a debt to the Federal Government.  Repayment of the bonus 
is not required when the employee is involuntarily separated for reasons other than 
misconduct or performance.  

       b.   Student loan repayments require a service agreement of 3 years.  The 3-year   
service agreement is established in statute, may not be pro-rated, and begins when the first 
payment is made to the holder of the loan.  An employee who fails to complete the period 
of employment established under the student loan service agreement is indebted to the 
Federal Government and must reimburse the Agency for the entire amount of any student 
loan repayment benefits received.  Repayment of the student loan is not required when the 
employee is involuntarily separated for reasons other than misconduct or performance. Any  
balance owing must be recovered from the employee by offset from an indebted  

  9 

 
 
 
 
 
     
         
 
   
 
 
 
 
October 1, 2002 

FEMA Instruction 3100.5 

Government employee under 5 U.S.C. 5514 and 5 CFR 550, Subpart K, or through the 
appropriate provisions governing debt collection if the individual is no longer a Federal 
employee.  

c.  The employee may request a waiver of repayment for any of the incentives covered  
in this policy through his or her supervisor.  The request must include the employee’s name, 
a copy of the service agreement, and the reason(s) why repayment should be waived.  The 
supervisor will send the request, along with his or her recommendation, through the head of 
the organization and through the Director, Human Resources Division (HRD) for 
concurrence or nonconcurrence.  The Director, HRD, will forward to the FEMA Director 
who will render a written decision.  WAIVERS WILL BE RARE and will be based on a 
determination that recovery would be against equity and good conscience or against the 
public interest.  A copy of the approval or disapproval of the waiver will be provided to the 
Human Resources Division. 

10.  Reporting Requirements.  The Human Resources Division will submit an annual 
report to the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on the use of these incentives. 

11.  Documentation and Recordkeeping Procedures.  A record of each determination made 
to effect the incentives will be maintained in the Human Resources Division.  At a 
minimum, the documentation will include a copy of the SF-52, FEMA Form 30-67, with 
appropriate supporting documentation, and a copy of the service agreement.  These records 
may be destroyed after 3 years or after OPM formally evaluates the program, whichever 
occurs first. 

/s/ 
 ___________________________ 
 Joe M. Allbaugh 

Director 

Attachments 

A-Definitions of Terms 
B-FEMA Form 30-67, Request for Incentive Pay 
C-FEMA Form 30-68, Bonus Service Agreement 
D-FEMA Form 30-69, Student Loan Repayment Service Agreement 
(forms may be obtained electronically from http://DocNet.fema.gov ) 

10

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FEMA Instruction 3100.5 

October 1, 2002 

Attachment A 

Definitions of Terms 

Aggregate Limitation on Pay - means that the employee’s total aggregate pay 
compensation may not exceed the current pay rate of level I of the Executive Schedule in 
any one calendar year.  Therefore, any part of a bonus or allowance that would exceed 
that limit for the current calendar year must be withheld until the next calendar year.  

Basic Pay - is the total amount of pay an employee received during any one calendar year 
at the rate fixed for the position by law or administrative action.  Basic pay does not 
include locality comparability adjustments or additional pay of any other kind and is 
calculated before any deductions. 

Commuting Area - means the geographic area that is normally considered one area for 
employment purposes.  It includes any population center (or neighboring ones) and the 
surrounding localities where people live and reasonably can be expected to travel back 
and forth daily to work. 

Difficult-to-fill Position - there is no specific definition that describes a difficult-to-fill 
position.  However, various factors such as the following can be indicators in determining 
that a position is—or is likely to be—difficult to fill: 

   Success of recent recruiting or retaining efforts; 
   Recent turnover in similar positions; and 
   Labor market factors affecting the Agency’s ability to recruit or retain high-  
     quality candidates.        

High-Quality Candidate - there is no specific definition that describes a high-quality 
candidate.  However, factors such as the following can be considered indicators of high 
quality: 

   Unique or unusually high qualification (education, experience, expertise, etc.); 
   Specialized skills that are scarce in the relevant labor market; and 
   Ability to perform functions that are crucial to the Agency’s mission.  

Involuntary Separation - refers to a separation initiated by the agency against the 
employee’s will and without his/her consent for reasons other than cause on charges of 
misconduct or performance. 

Newly Appointed - means the position is the individual’s first civilian appointment, 
regardless of tenure, in the Federal Government or the individual has worked for the 
Federal government before, but there has been a break in service of at least 90 days.  See 
5 CFR section 575.103 for exceptions to the 90-day break in service. 

A-1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
October 1, 2002 

FEMA Instruction 3100.5 

Pro-rata Share - an amount of a relocation or recruitment bonus requiring repayment 
that is calculated by dividing the total amount of the bonus by the entire service period 
(expressed in months).  The repayment amount will be this result multiplied by the 
remaining full months of the service agreement. 

Recruitment Bonus - is a one-time payment to entice a candidate to accept an agency’s  
offer of employment.  Agencies may pay a recruitment bonus in order to fill a position  
with a high-quality candidate from outside the Federal Government, provided there is a  
determination that, without of such a bonus, the position will be difficult-to-fill. 

Relocation Bonus - is a one-time payment to entice a current Federal employee to accept 
a position in a different commuting area, provided there is a determination that, without 
such a bonus, the position will be difficult-to-fill.    

Retention Allowance - is an ongoing payment over and above basic pay that is paid to  
retain a current Federal employee in his or her present position.  It should be determined  
that the position is difficult to fill and the unusually high qualifications of the employee  
or a special need for the employee’s services makes it essential to retain the employee.   

Service Agreement - is a written agreement between an agency and an employee in 
which the employee agrees to a specified period of employment in return for recruitment 
or relocation bonus or the repayment of a student loan. 

Student Loan Repayment Authority - permits agencies to repay student loans to recruit 
or retain highly qualified individuals in difficult-to-fill positions.  The repayment 
authority is limited to certain federally insured loans (see paragraph 8d(5) of the 
instruction) for a list of specific loans. 

Superior Qualifications Appointment - means an appointment made at a rate above the 
minimum rate of the appropriate general schedule grade because of the superior 
qualifications of the candidate or a special need of the agency for the candidate’s 
services. 

Pay Compensation - means the total of basic pay received; locality-based pay 
adjustments; premium pay; incentive awards and performance-based awards; recruitment 
and relocation bonuses; retention allowances; supervisory differentials under 5 U.S.C. 
5755; post differentials under 5 U.S.C. 5925; danger pay allowances under 5 U.S.C. 
5928; allowances based on environmental conditions for employees stationed outside of 
the continental United States under 5 U.S.C. 5941(a)(2); and, continuation of pay under 5 
U.S.C. 8118. 

A-2 

 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 

OVERVIEW .............................................................................................................................................................. 1

OVERARCHING APPROACH ........................................................................................................................... 1

CHAPTER 1: GENERAL INFORMATION ..................................................................................................... 2

A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.

APPLICABILITY AND SCOPE ............................................................................................................................ 2
FEMA AWARDS PROGRAM BASICS .............................................................................................................. 2
GENERAL AWARDS RULES ............................................................................................................................. 3
CASH OR MONETARY AWARDS ...................................................................................................................... 3
HONORARY OR NON-MONETARY AWARDS ................................................................................................. 3
RECOGNITION ITEMS ......................................................................................................................................... 4
AWARDS AND RECOGNITION ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE ................................................................. 4
REPORTING AND RECORDKEEPING ............................................................................................................... 6

CHAPTER 2: TYPES OF RECOGNITION ..................................................................................................... 7

A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.

ADMINISTRATOR’S AWARDS ........................................................................................................................... 7
LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS ....................................................................................................................... 7
ON-THE-SPOT AWARDS ................................................................................................................................... 8
PERFORMANCE-BASED AWARDS .................................................................................................................. 9
QUALITY STEP INCREASE ............................................................................................................................. 10
CORE STEP INCREASE ................................................................................................................................. 11
SPECIAL ACT AWARDS ................................................................................................................................. 12
TIME-OFF AWARDS ........................................................................................................................................ 14
CANDIDATE REFERRAL BONUS PROGRAM ............................................................................................... 16

ADDITIONAL INFORMATION ........................................................................................................................ 18

REVIEW CYCLE ....................................................................................................................................................... 18
AUTHORITIES .......................................................................................................................................................... 18
REFERENCES .......................................................................................................................................................... 18
FORMS ...................................................................................................................................................................... 18
DEFINITIONS ............................................................................................................................................................ 19
MONITORING AND EVALUATION .......................................................................................................................... 20
QUESTIONS ............................................................................................................................................................. 21

APPENDIX A – GUIDELINES FOR PERFORMANCE-BASED AWARDS DISTRIBUTION ..... 22

APPENDIX B – GUIDELINES FOR AWARD AMOUNTS FOR SPECIAL ACTS AND TIME-
OFF .......................................................................................................................................................................... 23

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Overview  
These Instructions provide guidance for the administration, implementation, and 
oversight of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Employee Awards 
and Recognition Program (Awards and Recognition Program). FEMA’s Awards and 
Recognition Program recognizes employee performance, achievements, exceptional 
contributions, and service toward meeting Agency goals and improving the efficiency, 
effectiveness, and economy of the government. The Awards and Recognition Program 
supports a climate in FEMA that values employees and facilitates a workplace that 
motivates, excites, encourages, stimulates, and rewards. All employees, including 
supervisors, share the responsibility of rewarding and recognizing achievements and 
contributions. 

These Instructions supersede: 

  FEMA Manual 255-4-1: Employee Awards and Recognition, dated September 

26, 2013. 

  Chapter 6-4: Step Increases, FEMA Manual 255-11-1: Cadre of On-Call 

Response/Recovery Employee (CORE) Program, dated August 25, 2015. 

  Chapter 10-2: Time-Off Awards, FEMA Manual 123-10-1: Absence and Leave, 

dated December 29, 2015. 

  The relevant portions of FEMA Directive 010-7: Incident Management Assistance 
Team (IMAT) Program Directive, dated January 12, 2015, starting in calendar 
year 2018 at which point these Instructions cover IMAT employees. 

Overarching Approach  
Consistent with the following policies from DHS, these instructions outline FEMA's 
criteria for recognizing and rewarding employees: 

  DHS Management Directive (MD) 255-01: Honorary Awards, dated October 31, 

2007.  

  DHS MD 255-01-001: Instruction Guide on Honorary Awards, dated November 6, 

2007.  

  DHS MD 255-02: Employee Recognition, dated October 31, 2007.  

  DHS MD 255-02-001: Instruction Guide on Employee Recognition, dated 

November 6, 2007.  

  DHS Instruction Manual 255-03-001-01: Time-Off Awards, dated March 25, 

2015. 

Supervisors and employees should implement these Instructions in order to determine 
award decisions and follow appropriate protocol for the nomination of awards. 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 1: General Information 
Outcome: FEMA's Awards and Recognition Program is administered consistently and 
fairly for all eligible employees.  

A.  Applicability and Scope  

1.  The Awards and Recognition Program applies to all FEMA employees who meet 

the definition of “employee” under 5 U.S.C. § 2105, including Stafford Act 
employees, except as excluded in paragraph 2 below. However, Cadre of On-
Call Response/Recovery (CORE), and Reservist employees are not eligible for 
all award types as detailed in these Instructions, and Senior Executive Service 
(SES) employees are only eligible for the Administrator’s Award and honorary 
awards. 

2.  In addition to the restrictions set forth in 5 Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.) § 

451.105, the Awards and Recognition Program does not apply to:  

a.  Members of the uniformed military services in their official military capacity 

except for cash or monetary awards for suggestions, inventions, and scientific 
achievements as provided for under 10 U.S.C. § 1124. 

b.  Private citizens and organizations (including FEMA contractors). 

c.  Employees paid from non-appropriated funds.  

d.  Schedule C employees, except in limited circumstances. (Contact the Office 
of the Chief Component Human Capital Officer (OCCHCO) for additional 
guidance). 

3.  Pursuant to 5 C.F.R. § 451.104, awards for contributions made by an individual 
when employed by FEMA may be paid to a former employee or the estate or 
legal heirs of a deceased employee. Awards to separated or deceased military 
members for contributions made while the member was on active duty may be 
paid to the former member or to the member’s estate or legal heirs. 

B.  FEMA Awards Program Basics 

1.  FEMA is committed to maintaining a highly skilled workforce to guarantee quality 
service to the public. The Awards and Recognition Program is designed to create 
an environment where employees actively and continually seek exceptional ways 
to do their jobs, improve organizational performance, and take great pride in their 
achievements. The Awards and Recognition Program recognizes employees’ 
accomplishments, contributions, and innovations in support of the Agency's 
vision, mission, and goals. 

2.  All award nominations under this Awards and Recognition Program must 

demonstrate that the accomplishment has contributed to and is aligned with 
FEMA's goals. 

3.  FEMA Form 255-4-1-1: Award Nomination must be used for all awards 

nominations. 

2 

 
 
 
 
4.  Award justifications must describe the employee's specific accomplishment or 
contribution, explain why it warrants recognition, describe the tangible and/or 
intangible benefits, and provide the rationale for the recommended award 
amount.  

5.  Employees who have received, or are in the process of receiving, a written 

disciplinary or adverse action during the past 52 weeks are ineligible for awards 
and recognition other than Length of Service Awards. 

6.  Awards may not be used:  

a.  To recognize an employee for performing additional duties during or as a 

result of a temporary promotion;  

b.  To compensate an employee for perceived discrepancies or inadequacies in 

the pay system; or  

c.  As a farewell gift. 

C.  General Awards Rules 

1.  Cash or monetary awards are not considered a part of an employee’s basic pay. 

2.  Cash or monetary awards greater than $6,000 must be approved by the DHS 

Deputy Secretary. 

3.  An honorary award does not consist of cash. 

D.  Cash or Monetary Awards 

1.  Cash awards recognize exceptional performance by an individual or group in 
support of the Agency's goals. Cash awards are special acts, on-the-spot, or 
performance-based awards. Eligible FEMA employees may receive a special act 
or on-the-spot award in combination with a time-off award (TOA) at the discretion 
of the Office or Directorate. 

2.  Only one cash award may be granted for each achievement or contribution. 

However, employees may receive both a cash and honorary award for the same 
contribution.  

3.  Employees may receive more than one cash award in a fiscal year, but an award 
may not exceed the dollar limits set by the Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM), DHS, or the FEMA Administrator, Deputy Administrator, or designee.  
See the Annual Awards Guidance for more information. 

4.  All cash awards must be documented by a Standard Form (SF) 50: Notification of 

Personnel Action and a written justification.  

E.  Honorary or Non-Monetary Awards 

1.  Honorary awards are intended immediately to recognize employees for 

contributing to mission and strategic goals. An honorary award may be presented 
at any level of the Agency in recognition of exceptional efforts and contributions 
made by employee(s) or group(s). All employee types are eligible for honorary 
awards.  

3 

 
 
 
2.  Each Program Head (Office or Directorate) is responsible for developing an 

honorary awards program at appropriate levels. Each organization’s honorary 
awards program procedures must be submitted to OCCHCO for assessment and 
approval prior to implementation.  

3.  Recognition items for honorary awards must not be funded from the cash award 

allocation. Program areas must budget for funding their honorary awards 
program recognition items with program funds. Recipients may receive 
recognition items such as a letter, certificate, pin, plaque with citation, or other 
items of nominal value not to exceed $20.  

4.  Receipt of a FEMA honorary award does not preclude award of a DHS honorary 

award recognizing the same act or contribution.  

F.  Recognition Items 

1.  Overview 

a.  Recognition items are honorary awards and must not be funded from the 
cash award allocations but may use appropriated funds if otherwise in 
accordance with these Instructions. Program areas must budget for funding 
their honorary awards program recognition items with program funds. 
Recipients may receive items such as a letter, certificate, pin, plaque with 
citation, or other recognition items of nominal value not to exceed $20. 

b.  Recognition items may be purchased from a variety of sources including the 
Homeland Security Employees Association. Recognition items should be 
purchased from multiple companies, and purchasing officials should not favor 
a single company. If the item is branded, then DHS Branding Guidance must 
be followed.  

2.  All employees are eligible to receive recognition items. 

3.  Honorary awards may or may not be accompanied by a recognition item. For 
example, an honorary award could simply be given as a certificate, or it could 
include a FEMA coin, FEMA mug, etc.  

4.  Nomination 

Any FEMA employee can make a nomination for receipt of a recognition item.  

5.  Approval 

The Program Head (Office or Directorate) determines the approval process for 
issuing recognition items by their Office or Directorate. 

G.  Awards and Recognition Organizational Structure 

1.  OCCHCO is responsible for:  

a.  Establishing and providing oversight of the Awards and Recognition Program; 

b.  Reporting and recordkeeping; 

c.  Maintaining a list of positions that are included Candidate Referral Program; 

4 

 
 
 
d.  Determining whether employees will exceed their annual limits for certain 

types of awards; 

e.  Reviewing award nomination forms; and  

f.  Processing the awards for payment. All approved nomination forms must be 

forwarded to OCCHCO for processing and recordkeeping. 

2.  The FEMA Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO) is responsible for: 

a.  Calculating and providing program offices with their allocation of funds for 

cash awards based on guidance from the Office of Management and Budget; 

b.  Issuing the Annual Awards Guidance in conjunction with OCCHCO; and  

c.  Providing OCCHCO with all of the Line of Accounting (LOA) codes. 

3.  The Program Heads (Office or Directorate) are responsible for: 

a.  Ensuring that awards are based on merit and distributed;  

b.  Establishing delegations of approving authority for honorary award programs 

within the guidelines of these Instructions; 

c.  Funding their award allocations out of their salary and benefits budget and 

ensure there is sufficient funding to pay their base salary and benefits before 
funding the awards; 

d.  Only authorizing or approving an award if the dollar amount of the award is 

within their allocation; and 

e.  Ensuring the total cost of cash awards issued does not exceed published 

allocations.  

i.  Program Heads (Office or Directorate) are delegated the authority to grant 
cash or monetary awards for amounts up to and including $6,000 per 
award. At no time should any Office or Directorate exceed their funding to 
issue/pay/distribute any award. 

4.  Supervisors and/or other designated management officials are responsible for 

recommending and rewarding employees whose performance, contributions, or 
activities merit recognition.  

5.  The Awards Coordinator is responsible for: 

a.  Reviewing and approving FEMA Form 255-4-1-1: Award Nomination Award 

Nomination; 

b.  Verifying the award nomination contains a funded LOA code, as applicable, 
after the Program Head (Office or Directorate) signs to approve the award; 

c.  Ensuring an employee has not received cash two awards at the same 

organizational level for the same contribution; 

d.  Checking to ensure that the justification meets the requirements and the 

documentation is complete; and 

5 

 
 
 
 
e.  Completing the relevant spreadsheet to ensure that the office does not 
exceed its allotment (see OCCHCO Job Aid: How to Review Award 
Nominations in FHR Navigator as a Coordinator, 13 March 2015). 
6.  The DHS Deputy Secretary is responsible for approving any cash or monetary 

awards greater than $6,000 per employee up to and including $10,000.  

7.  The Director of OPM is responsible for approving cash or monetary awards 

greater than $10,000 and up to and including $24,999. 

8.  The President of the United States is responsible for approving awards of 

$25,000 or more. 

H.  Reporting and Recordkeeping 

1.  OCCHCO will evaluate the application of the Awards and Recognition Program 
on an annual basis for conformity to 5 C.F.R. Part 250 and the requirements of 
the Human Capital Assessment and Accountability Framework.  

2.  OCCHCO must document all cash awards, quality step increases, and TOAs in 

accordance with the OPM Guide to Processing Personnel Actions.  

3.  OCCHCO must file award documents in compliance with the OPM Guide to 

Personnel Record-keeping.  

4.  OCCHCO will collect the appropriate information and report to the DHS Chief 
Human Capital Officer, the FEMA Office of Equal Rights (OER), and OPM as 
directed. 

6 

 
 
 
 
Chapter 2: Types of Recognition 
Outcome: Agency officials and employees are aware of the types of recognition 
available within FEMAs Awards and Recognition Program. 

A.  Administrator’s Awards 

1.  Overview 

a.  The Administrator’s Award is the highest form of award and recognition within 
FEMA. The Administrator’s Award is honorary and can only be bestowed by 
the Administrator. The award is given to individuals and groups that have 
clearly demonstrated extraordinary performance in support of the Agency's 
goals. 

b.  At a minimum, the Administrator’s Award includes a plaque or certificate 
detailing the specifics of the award. The Administrator’s Award is usually 
presented at the Agency's Award Ceremony, but may be given at any time at 
the discretion of the Administrator. 

2.  Eligibility 

All FEMA employees who have worked as FEMA employees for at least one year 
are eligible to receive the Administrator’s Award. Members of FEMA Corps are 
also eligible to receive the Administrator’s Award. 

3.  Nomination 

a.  Each year, the Office of the Administrator issues awards guidance, including 

the process for submitting nominations.  

b.  Each nomination must include the appropriate justification and 

documentation. 

4.  Each year, the Office of the Administrator develops a process for reviewing and 

approving Administrator's Awards. 

B.  Length of Service Awards 

1.  Overview 

a.  Length of Service recognition is an honorary award consisting of a certificate 
and pin given for years of service in the Federal Government. This includes 
all active duty military service in the length of service calculation regardless of 
whether the employee is retired from the military.  

b.  The recognized years of service are in five-year increments starting with the 

tenth year of service established by the Service Computation Date for Leave. 
Length of Service recognition awards should be presented at an appropriate 
organization meeting. 

2.  Eligibility 

All employees except SES and Reservist employees are eligible for Length of 
Service Awards. 

7 

 
 
 
3.  Each quarter, OCCHCO will provide Length of Service Awards to the Program 
Head (Office or Directorate) to present appropriately to qualifying employees. 

4.  OCCHCO will determine those employees who meet the length of service 

requirement for career service recognition. 

C.  On-the-Spot Awards 

1.  Overview 

a.  On-the-Spot (OTS) awards are cash awards and provide immediate 

recognition for a worthy non-recurring contribution, specific act, or service in 
the public interest and exceeding normal job requirements.  

b.  OTS award contributions may include: 

i.  Making a high quality contribution involving a difficult or important issue, 

project, or assignment. 

ii.  Displaying special initiative and skill in completing an assignment or 

project before the deadline.  

iii.  Using initiative and creativity to improve a product, activity, program, or 

service.  

iv.  Ensuring an Office or Directorate’s mission is accomplished during a 
difficult period by successfully completing additional work or a project 
assignment while maintaining the employee’s own workload.  

2.  Eligibility 

All employees except SES and Reservist employees are eligible for one OTS 
award per quarter ranging from $100 up to and including $500 and not to exceed 
$2,000 per fiscal year. 

3.  Nomination 

a.  Any FEMA employee may submit a nomination for an OTS award for 

supporting contributions to another program or effort to the employee’s 
supervisor of record for consideration with a written justification. The 
nomination may include a funded LOA code.  

b.  The supervisor of record prepares FEMA Form 255-4-1-1: Award Nomination 

and submits per the annual awards guidance, including a narrative 
justification describing the basis for the award and the amount of the award. 
The narrative justification must support the award level chosen. 

i.  The Office or Directorate will submit the award nomination via the 

approved process.  

ii.  Supervisors should recognize employees as quickly as possible when 

granting an OTS award. 

4.  Approval 

a.  The supervisor verifies with OCCHCO that this award plus prior OTS awards 
for the employee in the fiscal year will not exceed the $2,000 limit. In addition, 

8 

 
 
 
the supervisor will verify the availability of funds with the Office or 
Directorate’s business manager/unit.  

b.  All OTS awards must be approved by the employee’s second-level supervisor 

and/or Program Head (Office or Directorate). 

c.  The employee’s Office or Directorate will submit the award nomination via the 

approved process provided. 

d.  All approved nomination forms must be forwarded to OCCHCO for processing 

and recordkeeping 

D.  Performance-Based Awards 

1.  Overview 

a.  Performance-based awards are lump-sum cash awards or TOAs designed to 
recognize employees for the accomplishment of duties based on merit at the 
end of the performance cycle. Performance-based cash awards are granted 
based on the employee’s rating of record. 

b.  Performance-based awards may not exceed 10% of the employee’s annual 
rate of basic pay unless the FEMA Administrator or Deputy Administrator, 
with the approval of the DHS Deputy Secretary, determines that exceptional 
performance by an employee justifies a larger percentage not to exceed 20% 
of the employee’s annual rate of basic pay. Notwithstanding these percentage 
caps, the DHS Deputy Secretary must approve cash or monetary awards 
greater than $6,000 per employee up to and including $10,000, the Director of 
OPM must approve cash or monetary awards over $10,000 but under 
$25,000, and the President of the United States must approve awards of 
$25,000 or more.  

c.  In accordance with 5 C.F.R. § 451.104(g), when granting an award as a 
percentage of basic pay, the rate of basic pay used must include any 
applicable locality payment or special rate supplement. 

d.  Offices or Directorates will reserve at least 60% of their annual awards budget 

to be used for performance-based awards.  

e.  A performance-based award may not be combined with another award. 

2.  Employee Preference 

a.  Supervisors may not give their eligible employees a choice between a specific 

cash or equivalent TOA. 

b.  However, management may ask all eligible employees whether they would 
prefer either a cash or TOA before deciding whether to grant an award. 
Management may not provide or imply a guarantee of a performance-based 
award type or amount. 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
3.  Eligibility 

a.  All employees except SES employees are eligible for performance-based 

awards. However, Reservists are only eligible for a cash award and not time-
off.  

b.  Employees must have: 

i.  A signed performance plan for a minimum of 90 days (or have at least one 

deployment evaluation for Reservists); 

ii.  Supporting progress review(s) (or deployment evaluation(s) for 

Reservists); and 

iii.  A rating of record of “exceeded expectations” for the last performance 

cycle. 

4.  Nomination 

A performance-based award nomination may only be made by an employee's 
supervisor of record using FEMA Form 255-4-1-1: Award Nomination and based 
on the current performance appraisal (rating of record). The supervisor of record 
will verify the current performance appraisal for eligibility, complete a FEMA Form 
255-4-1-1: Award Nomination, and forward the nomination to the employee’s 
second-level supervisor for review and approval via the approved process. 

5.  Approval 

a.  The second-level supervisor and the Program Head (Office or Directorate) 

must approve performance-based awards.  

b.  The Office or Directorate will submit the award nomination via the approved 

process. 

c.  All approved nomination forms must be forwarded to OCCHCO for processing 

and recordkeeping 

E.  Quality Step Increase 

1.  Overview 

a.  A Program Head (Office or Directorate) may grant a Quality Step Increase 

(QSI) in recognition of high quality performance above that ordinarily found in 
the type of position concerned. It provides an incentive to the employee and 
recognizes unusually high quality performance by granting an earlier than 
normal step increase. However, an employee who receives a QSI is eligible 
for only one additional step increase within any 52-week period. 

b.  A QSI is not an equivalent increase under 5 C.F.R. § 531.407 and will not 

start a new waiting period for the next within-grade increase. However, receipt 
of a QSI may delay the next regular within-grade increase. When receipt of a 
QSI moves an employee to the fourth or seventh step of a grade, the waiting 
period for a regular within-grade increase is extended by 52 weeks from the 
effective date of the QSI under the graduated waiting-period schedule 
prescribed by 5 U.S.C. § 5335(a). When receipt of a QSI moves an employee 

10 

 
 
 
to the eighth or ninth step of a grade, the waiting period for a regular within-
grade increase is not extended. 

c.  Offices or Directorates are responsible to ensure all QSIs are sustainable 
within their published salaries and benefits targets for the fiscal year of 
execution and two fiscal years thereafter. 

2.  Eligibility 

a.  All full-time General Schedule (GS) or FWS employees in the GS pay plan 

below step 10 in their grade level are eligible for a QSI.  Stafford Act 
employees are not eligible for a QSI. 

b.  The employee’s most recent rating of record must be at level 5 (“achieved 

excellence”). 

c.  The employee may not receive more than one QSI in any 52-week period. 

3.  Nomination 

a.  A QSI nomination may only be made by an employee's supervisor of record. 

The employee's second-level supervisor and Program Head (Office or 
Directorate) must concur with the nomination. 

b.  Nominations for QSIs must be submitted within 30 days of approval of the 
ratings of record. Each nomination must include appropriate justification for 
the QSI using FEMA Form 255-4-1-1: Award Nomination based on the rating 
of record, and be submitted via the approved process.  

4.  Approval 

a.  The employee's second-level supervisor and Program Head (Office or 

Directorate) must approve the QSI nomination. 

b.  All approved nomination forms must be forwarded to OCCHCO for processing 

and recordkeeping 

F.  CORE Step Increase 

1.  Overview 

a.  A Program Head (Office or Directorate) may grant a CORE Step Increase 

(CSI) in recognition of high quality performance above that ordinarily found in 
the type of position concerned. It provides an incentive to the employee and 
recognizes unusually high quality performance by granting an earlier than 
normal step increase. However, an employee who receives a CSI is eligible 
for only one additional step increase within any 52-week period. 

b.  A CSI is not an equivalent increase under 5 C.F.R. § 531.407 and will not 

start a new waiting period for the next within-grade increase. However, receipt 
of a CSI may delay the next regular within-grade increase. When receipt of a 
CSI moves an employee to the fourth or seventh step of a grade, the waiting 
period for a regular within-grade increase is extended by 52 weeks from the 
effective date of the CSI under the graduated waiting-period schedule 
prescribed by 5 U.S.C. § 5335(a). When receipt of a CSI moves an employee 

11 

 
 
 
to the eighth or ninth step of a grade, the waiting period for a regular within-
grade increase is not extended. 

c.  Offices or Directorates are responsible to ensure all CSIs are sustainable 
within their published salaries and benefits targets for the fiscal year of 
execution and two fiscal years thereafter. 

2.  Eligibility 

a.  Prior to the completion of the requisite waiting period, a supervisor may 

recommend one additional step increase per year if warranted by the CORE’s 
performance. 

b.  All COREs paid via the IC pay plan are eligible for a CSI.  GS and FWS 

employees are not eligible for a CSI. 

c.  To be eligible for a CSI, a CORE must have “achieved excellence” on their 

most recent annual performance evaluation.  

3.  Nomination 

a.  A CSI nomination may only be made by a CORE employee's supervisor of 

record. 

b.  Nominations should be prepared as soon as possible following the 

contribution to ensure timely recognition, generally within 90 days of approval 
of the rating of record. Each nomination must include appropriate justification 
for the CSI using FEMA Form 255-4-1-1: Award Nomination based on the 
rating of record, and be submitted via the approved process provided in the 
annual awards guidance. 

4.  Approval 

a.  The employee's second-level supervisor and Program Head (Office or 

Directorate) must approve the CSI nomination. 

b.  All approved nomination forms must be forwarded to OCCHCO for processing 

and recordkeeping 

G.  Special Act Awards 

1.  Overview 

a.  Special Act Awards are one-time, lump-sum cash awards granted in 

recognition of a meritorious personal effort, act, service, scientific contribution, 
or other achievement accomplished within or outside assigned job 
responsibilities related to official employment with FEMA.  

b.  Special Act Awards can be given at any time, but individuals or groups cannot 

be recognized for the same specific contribution more than once.  

c.  The act or contribution must result in either tangible or intangible benefits, or 

both, to the government and may involve more than one employee.  

d.  Management officials should use Appendix B – Guidelines for Award 

Amounts for Special Acts and Time-Off for assistance in determining Special 

12 

 
 
 
Act Award amounts commensurate with contributions and must not exceed 
$6,000 per award.  

e.  Examples of the types of achievements for which Special Act Awards are 

appropriate include, but are not limited to: 

i.  Making scientific and technological advances.  

ii.  Actions and innovations that contribute significantly to more efficient or 
economical operations, thus delivering tangible operational benefits.  

iii.  Acting in an exemplary or courageous manner in an emergency situation 

related to official employment.  

iv.  Publishing articles, presenting technical papers to professional 

organizations, or performing similar personal projects that contribute 
significantly to a FEMA mission.  

v.  Improving service to the public in a specific or measurable way.  

vi.  Notably improving the public relations of DHS and/or FEMA.  

vii. Other noteworthy achievements.  

2.  Eligibility 

a.  All FEMA employees are eligible for Special Act Awards except SES 

employees. 

b.  Employees may only receive one award per specific contribution.  

3.  Nomination 

a.  Each nomination must include appropriate written justification for the award.  

b.  Any FEMA employee may informally make a nomination for a Special Act 
Award by submitting a written justification to the nominated employee’s 
supervisor.  

4.  Approval 

a.  The supervisor of record should prepare a nomination as soon as possible 
following the contribution to ensure timely recognition, generally within 90 
days. 

b.  The employee's second-level supervisor and Program Head (Office or 

Directorate) must also approve the nomination.  

c.  The Office or Directorate will submit the approved nomination via the 

approved process.  

d.  All approved nomination forms must be forwarded to OCCHCO for processing 

and recordkeeping 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
H.  Time-Off Awards  

1.  Overview 

a.  A TOA is an excused absence granted to an employee to be used without 

charge to leave or loss of pay in recognition of individual or group 
contributions or accomplishments. Contributions that may be recognized with 
a TOA include: 

i.  Making a high quality contribution involving a difficult or important issue, 

project, or assignment.  

ii.  Displaying special initiative and skill in completing an assignment or 

project before the deadline.  

iii.  Using initiative and creativity to improve a product, activity, program, or 

service.  

iv.  Ensuring an Office or Directorate’s mission is accomplished during a 
difficult period by successfully completing additional work or a project 
assignment while maintaining the employee’s own workload.  

b.  Full-time employees may be granted up to 80 hours of time-off during a leave 

year, but not more than 40 hours for a single contribution.  

c.  Part-time employees may be granted time-off up to the average number of 

work hours in the employee’s biweekly scheduled tour of duty during a leave 
year. The limit for any single contribution for part-time employees is one-half 
the maximum that may be granted during the leave year.  

d.  TOAs will be granted and used in 15-minute increments.  

e.  Though TOAs may not have an immediate budget consequence, supervisors 
must fully consider wage costs and productivity loss when granting TOAs and 
must ensure that the amount of time-off granted as an award is 
commensurate with the employee’s contribution or accomplishment. 
Supervisors must follow the Annual Awards Guidance for tracking/reporting 
awards. 

f.  TOAs must be scheduled and used within 26 pay periods from the effective 
date of processing. After the 26th pay period, any unused time-off will be 
automatically forfeited. 

g.  TOAs have no effect on annual leave carryover limitations. If an employee is 
scheduled to use a TOA and is unable to use it at that time, the employee 
may reschedule the TOA for another time, within the 26 pay period limitation.  

h.  Under 5 C.F.R. § 451.104(f), a TOA must not be converted to cash under any 

circumstances.  

i. 

If an employee separates from DHS before using all time-off hours then the 
employee forfeits any unused time-off. If forfeited, no other award or 
compensation may be substituted.  

14 

 
 
 
j. 

If an employee transfers to or from another DHS Component, the TOA will be 
transferred to the gaining DHS Component. 

k.  If an employee transfers to or from a federal agency outside of DHS, the TOA 
will be forfeited, and no other award or compensation may be substituted.  

l.  TOAs must not be granted to create the effect of a holiday or treated as 

administrative excusals or leave, i.e. granting the entire organization or office 
a TOA to be used on a specified day. 

2.  Eligibility 

All employees except SES and Reservist employees are eligible for TOAs. 

3.  Nomination 

a.  Any FEMA employee may informally make a nomination for a TOA by 

submitting a written justification to the nominated employee’s supervisor. 

b.  The employee’s supervisor of record will prepare a TOA nomination as soon 
as possible following the contribution or accomplishment to ensure timely 
recognition. The supervisor prepares FEMA Form 255-4-1-1: Award 
Nomination, including a written justification describing the basis for the award.  

c.  The employee’s supervisor of record must recommend an award amount 

based on the significance of the contribution using Appendix B – Guidelines 
for Award Amounts for Special Acts and Time-Off. The amount of time-off 
granted must be proportionate to the value of the contribution being 
recognized.  

4.  Approval 

a.  A written justification is required to document all TOAs. The supervisor of 
record may approve a TOA of one day or less. If the award exceeds nine 
hours, it must be reviewed and approved by the Program Head (Office or 
Directorate). 

b.  A TOA may be granted along with other forms of awards, with the exception 
of performance-based, as long as the total value of the awards given reflects 
the value of the contribution being recognized. For example, an employee 
might receive both a one-day TOA and a $100 special act or on-the-spot 
award as an award for a single contribution, as long as the combination of the 
awards does not exceed the value of the employee’s contribution based on 
Appendix B – Guidelines for Award Amounts for Special Acts and Time-Off. 
c.  The Office or Directorate will submit the award nomination via the approved 

process provided in the annual awards guidance. 

d.  OCCHCO will process the TOA in accordance with the OPM Guide to 

Processing Personnel Actions and issue the employee an SF-50: Notification 
of Personnel Action. A TOA may only be taken after it has been entered in the 
payroll/personnel system and is available in the National Finance Center’s 
database. 

15 

 
 
 
e.  All approved nomination forms must be forwarded to OCCHCO for processing 

and recordkeeping. 

I.  Candidate Referral Bonus Program  

1.  Overview 

a.  FEMA may augment its recruiting efforts by authorizing cash referral bonuses 
for employees who help FEMA identify candidates for hard-to-fill positions as 
determined by OCCHCO. The Associate Administrator, Mission Support, 
must determine whether positions within OCCHCO are hard-to-fill. 

b.  The Program Head (Office or Directorate) will submit a request to OCCHCO 
to include positions in the Candidate Referral Bonus Program. The request 
must include: 

i.  A list of positions requested to be included in the Candidate Referral 

Bonus Program; 

ii.  The factor(s) and supporting information to designate a position as hard-

to-fill; 

iii.  A time period for when referral bonuses may be paid; and 

iv.  The number of positions to be filled, or the number of referral bonuses that 

may be paid through this program. 

c.  Mission Support must consider the following factors when designating a 

position as hard-to-fill: 

i.  The lack of success of recent efforts to recruit candidates and retain 

employees in like positions; 

ii.  The availability in the labor market of highly qualified candidates; 

iii.  Recent turnover in similar positions; 

iv.  Special qualifications needed for the position; 

v.  Inability to meet or keep a sufficient Reservist force structure; and 

vi.  Any other unique factor that demonstrates difficulty in filling the position. 

d.  Referral bonuses may only be paid after OCCHCO verifies that the 

appropriate monies have been appropriated and allocated for such purpose. 

e.  OCCHCO will maintain a list of positions that are included in the Candidate 

Referral Program. 

f.  Eligible employees may receive a $100 referral bonus per referral, up to a 

maximum of ten referral bonuses per calendar year. 

g.  Referral bonuses will be paid in one lump-sum payment after a prospective 
employee is successfully on-boarded for a period of at least 90 days.  

h.  A referral bonus will only be granted once per hired candidate upon his or her 
initial appointment to FEMA. The referred candidate must identify the FEMA 
employee who referred him/her to FEMA. Only one employee may receive a 

16 

 
 
 
referral bonus per newly on-boarded candidate. Multiple referral bonuses will 
not be awarded for the same successfully on-boarded candidate. 

i.  Once an employee refers a candidate through the Candidate Referral Bonus 
Program, the employee may not advocate for the candidate’s appointment to 
anyone involved in the rating or selection of employees for the position. 

j.  The designation of hard-to-fill positions and the selection of candidates will be 
made without regard to race, color, religion, sex (including pregnancy and 
gender identity), national origin, political affiliation, sexual orientation, marital 
status, disability, genetic information, age, labor organization affiliation or non-
affiliation, parental status, military service, or other non-merit factor. 

2.  Eligibility 

a.  Any employee may refer a candidate for potential employment. 

b.  All employees are eligible to receive a referral bonus, except for the following 

restrictions: 

i.  Employees whose regular, recurring jobs include recruitment of new 
employees; employees who are involved, in any way, in the rating or 
selection of the referred candidate; or employees who refer a relative1 are 
ineligible for a referral bonus.  

ii.  During a Presidential election period,2 non-career SES members, 

Schedule C employees, and employees appointed by the President with 
Senate confirmation3 are ineligible to receive a referral bonus. 

3.  To apply for a referral bonus, eligible current employees must complete and send 
FEMA Form 255-4-1-2: Candidate Referral Bonus Form (available on the FEMA 
intranet) to the OCCHCO Talent Acquisition Division. 

4.  OCCHCO will review applications for a referral bonus, ensuring that the position 

is included in the program, and that the candidate identifies the referring 
employee prior to approving a referral bonus. 

1 “Relative” includes: father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, first cousin, nephew, 
niece, husband, wife, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-
law, stepfather, stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half-brother, or half-sister (5 
U.S.C. § 3110(a)(3)). 
2 A “Presidential election period” means any period beginning on June 1 in a calendar year in which the 
popular election of the President occurs, and ending on January 20 following the date of such election (5 
U.S.C. § 4508). 
3 In order to be ineligible for this referral bonus, the employee appointed by the President with Senate 
confirmation must be serving in an Executive Schedule position, or a position for which pay is set in 
statute by reference to a section or level of the Executive Schedule. 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
                                            
Additional Information 

Review Cycle 

FEMA Instructions 255-4-1: Awards and Recognition will be reviewed, reissued, 
revised, or rescinded within four years of the issue date. 

Authorities 

A.  5 U.S.C. Chapter 43, Performance Appraisal. 
B.  5 U.S.C. Chapter 45, Incentive Awards.  
C.  10 U.S.C. Chapter 57, Decorations and Awards.  
D.  5 U.S.C. § 5335, Periodic Step-Increases. 
E.  5 U.S.C. § 5336, Additional Step-Increases. 
F.  5 C.F.R. Part 250, Personnel Management in Agencies. 
G.  5 C.F.R. Part 451, Awards.  
H.  5 C.F.R. Part 531, Subpart E, Quality Step Increases. 

References 

A.  DHS MD 255-01: Honorary Awards, dated October 31, 2007.  

B.  DHS MD 255-01-001: Instruction Guide on Honorary Awards, dated November 6, 

2007.  

C.  DHS MD 255-02: Employee Recognition, dated October 31, 2007.  

D.  DHS MD 255-02-001: Instruction Guide on Employee Recognition, dated November 

6, 2007.  

E.  DHS Instruction Manual 255-03-001-01: Time-Off Awards, dated March 25, 2015. 

F.  FEMA Directive 112-15: Delegations of Authority, dated January 18, 2017. 

G.  OPM Guide to Processing Personnel Actions, online resource, last revised March 

2017. 

Forms 

A.  FEMA Form 255-4-1-1: Award Nomination  

B.  FEMA Form 255-4-1-2: Candidate Referral Bonus Form 

C.  OPM Standard Form 50: Notification of Personnel Action  

18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Definitions  

A.  Administrator’s Award. An honorary recognition bestowed by the Administrator of 

FEMA. The award is given to individuals and groups that have clearly demonstrated 
extraordinary performance in support of the Agency. This award is held in high 
esteem and is presented at the Administrator’s discretion. 

B.  Award. Something bestowed or an action taken to recognize and reward an 

individual, group, or team achievement for contributions that meet organizational 
goals or improve the efficiency, effectiveness, and economy of the government, 
DHS, FEMA, or the public interest. 

C.  Awards Coordinator. A designated representative within each FEMA Office or 

Directorate who manages the awards process including the review of nominations 
for compliance with guidelines, monitors awards funding, and otherwise assists the 
Program Head (Office or Directorate). A Delegation of Authority is required to 
appoint this representative.  

D.  Cash or Monetary Award. An award in the form of a lump-sum cash payment that 
does not increase the employee’s rate of basic pay and is based on tangible or 
intangible benefits to the federal government, DHS, or FEMA.  

E.  Contribution. An accomplishment achieved through an individual or group effort in 

the form of a special act or service in the public interest, connected with or related to 
official employment that contributes to the efficiency, economy, or other 
improvement of DHS, FEMA, or government operations. 

F.  CORE Step Increase. An increase in a CORE employee’s rate of basic pay from one 
step or rate of the grade of his or her position to the next higher step of that grade or 
rate within that grade in accordance with 5 U.S.C. § 5336. A CORE Step Increase is 
in addition to a periodic step increase under 5 U.S.C. § 5335. 

G.  Honorary or Non-Monetary Award. An award in which the recognition is not a cash 
payment or time-off award; rather it is an acknowledgment of an accomplishment or 
contribution through a letter, certificate, medal, plaque with citation, pin, apparel, or 
other recognition items of nominal value. 

H.  Little intrinsic or inherent value. Minimal monetary value as a necessary 

characteristic, of honorary or sentimental worth only. 

I.  Nominal Value. A recognition item worth less than $20, which is not equivalent to 

cash. 

J.  On-the-Spot Award. An individual cash award ranging from $100 to $500 per quarter 
(not to exceed $2,000 per employee per fiscal year) that provides recognition for a 
specific act or service that has served the public interest and has exceeded normal 
job requirements. 

K.  Performance-Based Award. A merit-based award that is directly linked to the 

Employee Performance Management Program and an employee’s rating of record. It 
can be given in the form of a lump-sum cash amount or a time-off award, but not in 
combination. 

19 

 
 
 
L.  Program Head (Office or Directorate). A Senior Executive Service member such as 
an Associate Administrator, Assistant Administrator, Regional Administrator, Office 
Chief and/or designee no lower than organization chart level three. 

M.  Quality Step Increase. A quality step increase is an increase in a GS employee’s 

rate of basic pay from one step or rate of the grade of his or her position to the next 
higher step of that grade or rate within that grade in accordance with 5 U.S.C. § 
5336. A Quality Step Increase is in addition to a periodic step increase under 5 
U.S.C. § 5335. 

N.  Rating of Record. A written performance appraisal that is prepared at the end of the 
performance cycle, covering an employee’s performance of assigned duties against 
performance expectations over the entire performance cycle and includes the 
assignment of a summary rating level. 

O.  Recognition Item. An award of nominal value such as a letter, certificate, pin, plaque 

with citation, apparel, or certificates. 

P.  Referral bonus. A cash award given to FEMA employees who help FEMA identify 

candidates for hard-to-fill positions as determined by the Chief Component Human 
Capital Officer (the Associate Administrator, Mission Support, must determine 
whether positions within the Office of the Chief Component Human Capital Officer 
are hard-to-fill). 

Q.  Special Act Award. A lump-sum cash award that recognizes specific 

accomplishments that have served FEMA and the public interest and have 
exceeded normal job requirements. These awards can be for individual or group 
contributions. This award can be given at any time, but individuals or groups may not 
be recognized monetarily for the same accomplishment more than once. 

R.  Summary Rating Level. The performance rating level that describes an employee’s 

overall performance during the performance cycle and which is a weighted 
calculation derived mathematically from an employee’s performance on both 
performance goals and core competencies. 

S.  Team or Group Award. A special act, time-off, or honorary award that recognizes 

two or more employees for a joint contribution.  

T.  Time-Off Award (TOA). An award in which time-off from duty is granted without loss 

of pay or charge to leave and for which the number of hours granted is 
commensurate with the employee’s contribution or accomplishment. This type of 
award is an alternate means of recognizing the superior accomplishments of 
employees. A time-off award must not be converted to a cash payment under any 
circumstances. 

Monitoring and Evaluation 

OCCHCO will evaluate the application of the Awards and Recognition Program on an 
annual basis for conformity with 5 C.F.R. Part 250 and the requirements of the OPM 
Human Capital Assessment and Accountability Framework.   

20 

 
 
 
 
OER will conduct trend analysis of the Awards and Recognition Program on an 
established schedule to ensure equal access to all qualified employees, pursuant to the 
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission’s Management Directive 715. 

Questions 

Please direct questions to the FEMA Human Capital Service Desk at FEMA-HC 
ServiceDesk@FEMA.DHS.gov or phone 866-896-8003.  

21 

 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX A – GUIDELINES FOR PERFORMANCE-BASED 
AWARDS DISTRIBUTION 

RATING OF RECORD 

LUMP-SUM 
CASH AWARD 

TIME-OFF AWARD 

Achieved Excellence 

2%-3.8% of Base Salary  Up to 40 Hours 

Exceeded Expectations 
Achieved Expectations  

.5%-1.95% of Base Salary  Up to 24 Hours 
None 

None 

Unacceptable 

None 

None 

22 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX B – GUIDELINES FOR AWARD AMOUNTS FOR 
SPECIAL ACTS AND TIME-OFF 

LIMITED 
Affects 
functions or 
personnel of 
one Office or 
Directorate, 
or  Region. 

EXTENDED 
Affects 
functions, 
mission, or 
personnel of 
more than one 
Office or 
Directorate,  or 
Region. 

BROAD 
Affects 
functions, 
mission, or 
personnel of 
the Agency. 

$200 - 400 
or 
1-4 Hours 

$401 - 650 
or 
5-7 Hours 

$651 - 900 
or 
8-10 Hours 

$401 - 650 
or 
6-10 Hours 

$651 - 900 
or 
11-15 Hours 

$901 - 1,300 
or 
16-20 Hours 

$651 - 900 
or 
15-20 Hours 

$901 - 1,300 
or 
21-25 Hours 

$1,301 - 3,150 
or 
26-30 Hours 

$901 - 1,300 
or 
25-30 Hours 

$1,301 - 3,150 
or 
31-35 Hours 

$3,151 – 6,000 
or 
36-40 Hours 

IMPACT 

MODERATE 

Change or modification 
of an operating principle 
or procedure with a 
relatively narrow use or 
impact. 

SUBSTANTIAL 

Substantial change or 
modification of 
procedures; an 
important 
improvement to the 
value of a product, 
activity, program, or 
service to the public. 

HIGH 

Complete revision of a 
basic principle or 
procedure; a highly 
significant 
improvement to the 
value of a product or 
service. 

EXCEPTIONAL 

Introduction of an 
important new principle 
or procedure; an 
extraordinary 
improvement to a 
critical product, activity, 
program, or service to 
the public. 

23 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FEMA DIRECTIVE: FEMA Employee 
Resource Groups  
FEMA Directive #112-10 

BACKGROUND  
This Directive is applicable to all Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) employees. 
This Directive does not supersede any other FEMA policy or directives. 

PURPOSE  

To establish FEMA standards, procedures, and responsibilities for non-union, voluntary employee 
organizations known as FEMA Employee Resource Groups (FERGs). 

PRINCIPLES  
A.  FEMA is committed to maintaining a workforce that reflects our Nation’s rich diversity and 

capitalizes on the varied cultural, professional, and ethnic backgrounds of our workforce and 
those we serve. FEMA encourages staff participation in FERGs to ensure representation of 
diverse perspectives in executing FEMA’s mission. 

B.  FERGs are a valuable mechanism to foster innovation, offer employees access to leadership 

opportunities, establish programs and activities aligned with FEMA’s mission, provide 
employees with development opportunities, and provide managers with innovative solutions to 
enhance diversity. 

C.  FERG activities may include, but are not limited to, assisting with recruitment and outreach 
events under the direction of the Office of the Chief Component Human Capital Officer 
(OCCHCO); organizing and participating in networking and mentoring opportunities; hosting 
career development workshops in coordination with the Office of Equal Rights (OER) and 
OCCHCO; co-hosting commemorative, cultural, educational, and social enrichment events; 
and assisting with conducting workplace trends and barrier analysis. 

D.  OER and the Diversity Management Advisory Council (DMAC), and FERGs will analyze 

workforce data to eliminate any equal opportunity barriers. 

REQUIREMENTS  
I.  Roles and Responsibilities 

Page 1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Outcome: Positions that have an actionable role for FERGs to understand their responsibilities. 

A.  Office of the Chief Component Human Capital Officer (OCCHCO) is responsible for: 

1.  Providing policy direction and oversight of the FERG program in collaboration with OER; 

2.  Reviewing and approving FERG charters; and 

3.  Appointing a liaison for each FERG in coordination with OER. 

B.  Office of Equal Rights (OER) is responsible for: 

1.  Providing policy direction and oversight of the FERG program in collaboration with 

OCCHCO; 

2.  Reviewing and approving FERG charters; and 

3.  Appointing a liaison for each FERG in coordination with OCCHCO. 

C.  Office of Chief Counsel (OCC) is responsible for: 

1.  Providing legal advice to FERGs; 

2.  Appointing at least one staff person to be a member of each FERG; 

3.  Reviewing and approving FERG charters; and 

4.  Reviewing and approving the use of the FEMA name and logo in publicity materials. 

D.  Diversity Management Advisory Council (DMAC) is responsible for: 

1.  Serving as the umbrella organization supporting the FERGs; 

2.  Appointing at least one staff person to be a member of each FERG; 

3.  Serving as a resource and advocate for FERGs; and 

4.  Serving as an advisory body to the Administrator and Deputy Administrator on diversity 

and inclusion issues. The goals of the DMAC are to: 

i.  Maintain a sustained commitment to diversity throughout FEMA’s senior leadership, 

front-line workforce, and overall organizational culture; 

ii.  Oversee implementation of FEMA's current Diversity Action Plan, and conduct 

diversity-focused strategic and succession planning efforts; 

iii.  Conduct analyses and make recommendations to FEMA senior leadership to 

confirm that diversity is fully and continuously leveraged within FEMA policies, plans, 
and programs; and 

iv.  Ensure that the face of FEMA optimally and equitably reflects the diverse fabric of 

American society. 

E.  Office of Equal Rights Deputy Director (or designee) (FERG Champion) is responsible for: 

1.  Overseeing the FERG Liaisons; and 

2.  Reviewing and approving announcements for FERGs. 

F.  FERG Senior Executive Service (SES) Sponsor is responsible for: 

Page 2 

 
 
 
 
 
1.  Ensuring FERG goals are accomplished; 

2.  Participating in FERG meetings; 

3.  Hosting events; 

4.  Mentoring FERG participants; 

5.  Playing an active role in their assigned FERG to support diversity and inclusion 

programs; 

6.  Supporting the professional development of FERG members; and 

7.  Participating in cultural literacy training. 

G.  FERG Liaisons are responsible for: 

1.  Assisting FERGs with conducting barrier analyses; 

2.  Assisting FERGs with hosting events; 

3.  Promoting FERG activities; and 

4.  Reviewing FERG-sponsored employee messaging. 

II.  Membership and Conduct 

Outcome: Employees understand the requirements to form a FERG, membership 
requirements, and the proper code of conduct. 

A.  Each FERG shall have at least one representative from OCCHCO, OER, OCC, and the 
DMAC. These representatives do not have to be group leaders, they can be members of 
the group. 

B.  Each FERG must have at least one SES Sponsor. SES Sponsors may be identified by 

FERG members, volunteer, or be invited to participate by OCCHCO or OER. 

C.  To become an official FERG, groups must have at least five (5) members. 

D.  Previously formed FERGs shall have three months from the date of issuance of this 

Directive to bring the composition of their FERG charter and bylaws into conformance with 
this Directive. 

E.  FERGs must ensure open membership to any interested FEMA employee. FERG 

membership is voluntary. FERGs cannot discriminate based on race, color, national origin, 
religion, age, sex, sexual orientation, disability, genetic information, or any other protected 
status. 

F.  FERGs must not assist or participate in a strike, work stoppage, or slowdown against the 
Government of the United States or any agency. No member should impose a duty or 
obligation to conduct, assist, or participate in a strike, work stoppage, or slowdown. 

G.  FERGs must provide annual reports on the FERG’s accomplishments and collaborative 

efforts to OCCHCO, OER, FERG Liaisons, and the DMAC. 

Page 3 

 
 
 
 
 
H.  At the beginning of each fiscal year, each FERG will submit a plan for the current fiscal 
year, which covers quarterly workshops, fiscal year objectives, membership recruitment 
plans, plans to conduct barrier analyses, and other activities. 

I.  FERGs must actively collaborate with the DMAC and the OER Affirmative Employment 

Program (AEP) to: 

1.  Further AEP goals (i.e., co-hosting observance events, conducting barrier analysis, and 

promoting diversity and inclusion); 

2.  Further the professional development of FERG members and similarly situated FEMA 

employees; and 

3.  Overcome barriers to workforce diversity. 

J.  Each FERG will be open to members across the agency. Multiple FERGs in different 
Regions or offices covering the same group or category of employees will not be 
authorized. 

III.  Guidance and Oversight 

Outcome: FERGs receive guidance and oversight from a coordinated group of FEMA offices 
and senior leaders. 

A.  The DMAC Co-Chairs oversee, monitor, and approve FERG activities as they relate to 

diversity and inclusion initiatives and the overall FEMA mission. OCCHCO and/or OER may 
rescind or cancel any FERG activity that is contrary to law, regulation, or FEMA operational 
requirements. 

B.  The AEP provides FERGs with advice regarding FEMA’s affirmative employment 

programs. 

C.  Each prospective FERG must coordinate with OCCHCO, OER, and the OCC, to draft a 
charter. OCCHCO, OER, and OCC must approve the charter of each FERG before the 
document is finalized. Any charter revisions must also be approved by OCCHCO, OER, 
and OCC before being implemented. 

D.  If a FERG becomes inactive, due to leadership, membership, and/or participation 

deficiencies (i.e., failing to adhere to this Directive or lack of participation), the DMAC may 
intervene to ensure the continuity of program services. The DMAC may also provide 
assistance in promoting FERGs to increase participation. Such intervention may include, 
but is not limited to, establishing interim leadership until an election is held. 

IV. FEMA Support of FERGs 

Outcome: FERGs are aware of the resources and support available across FEMA. 

A.  FERG Liaisons 

1.  FERG Liaisons will be assigned to assist the FERGs to conduct barrier analysis, co-

host observance events, and to assist with promoting the existence of the FERGs within 
the Agency. 

Page 4 

 
 
 
 
 
2.  FERG Liaisons are part of OCCHCO or OER and report to the OER Deputy Director 

(FERG Champion). 

B.  Use of email, interoffice mail, Intranet websites, and bulletin boards/digital messaging 

boards: 

1.  FERGs may use basic e-mail and interoffice mail, or bulletin boards/digital messaging 

boards to communicate or promote approved FERG activities. 

2.  FERG-sponsored employee messaging must be approved by the OER Deputy Director 

before submitting the message through the messaging review and concurrence 
process. FERG Liaisons will facilitate e-mail broadcasts and/or digital messaging 
boards, announcements, and other forms of communications for FERGs in coordination 
with Office of External Affairs’ Internal Communications Division. 

3.  All-employee communications, including the use of bulletin boards/digital messaging 

boards, the Intranet website, as well as social media use, must be approved through the 
Office of External Affairs, and FEMA ExecSec when applicable, before use/distribution 
in accordance with FEMA’s employee messaging policy. 

4.  URL links for officially recognized FEMA FERGs may be included on the DMAC and 
OER Intranet pages. FERGs interested in posting such links must coordinate with 
DMAC and FERG Liaisons for review and posting to the FEMA Intranet site. 

5.  FERG Liaisons will review the online content of FERG Intranet page(s) to ensure that 

FERG activities do not conflict with official Government duties, these standard operating 
procedures, or FEMA’s mission. 

6.  FERG Liaisons will post the FERG’s charter/bylaws on the OER Intranet page. 

7.  FERG Liaisons will insert the following pop-up language when URL links to external 

websites are used: “You are leaving the FEMA intranet. The site you are about to visit is 
not affiliated with FEMA. FEMA is not responsible for the availability or content of this 
external site, nor does it endorse, warrant or guarantee the services or information 
described or offered on the site. The views and information provided on the external 
website do not necessarily state or reflect those of FEMA.” 

8.  Paid advertisements are prohibited. 

9.  Announcements must state whether a FERG is solely sponsoring an event or if the 

event will be co-sponsored between a FERG and another FEMA entity. 

C.  Use of Government Equipment 

1.  Members of officially recognized FERGs may reasonably use Government telephone 

and Internet services in the same manner as is allowed for all employees. Use must not 
result in substantial cost to the Government. 

2.  FERG members may use of government equipment, such as computers, printers, 

copiers, and fax machines for FERG activities. 

D.  Professional Conference Attendance at Government Expense 

Page 5 

 
 
 
 
 
1.  Funds to attend professional conferences may come out of the operating budget of the 
office of each FERG member requesting to attend a conference. FEMA is not obligated 
to provide funds for employees to attend professional conferences. Any funding 
decision relating to conference attendance is not appealable or grievable. Office or 
Directorate heads may approve funding requests to attend a professional conference, if 
the use of appropriated funding is consistent with FEMA’s policies and directives, and 
only after determining that: 

i.  Attendance is for employee development and FEMA will benefit from the employee’s 
attendance (supervisors must review the agenda for the requested professional 
conference to ensure that FEMA and the employee will directly benefit from the 
conference); 

ii.  Funds are available and attendance is reported to the Office of the Chief Financial 

Officer per conference directive requirements; and 

iii.  The office and the employee’s workload will not be impacted detrimentally by the 

employee’s absence. 

2.  Supervisors may, at their discretion, limit the total number of attendees permitted at a 

specific event due to mission needs, budget, or workload concerns. Any decision to limit 
attendance is not appealable or grievable. 

3.  Employees who have a performance rating of unsatisfactory, or who are under a formal 

leave restriction, will not be authorized to attend professional conferences at 
government expense. 

4.  If an employee is currently under any medical restriction with regard to work, such as 
receiving workers’ compensation, OCCHCO must be consulted prior to approval. 

5.  Employees may request personal leave to attend professional conferences at their own 

expense in accordance with FEMA’s Absence and Leave policy. 

E.  FERGs may use FEMA facilities according to the normal processes and procedures for 

reserving and using such facilities. 

F.  FERGs are permitted to host fundraising activities at FEMA facilities in order to raise funds 
for programs and speakers in accordance with government ethics rules, FEMA policy, and 
with OCC approval. 

G.  Use of Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the organization name 

1.  FERGs must consult with FERG Liaisons (in coordination with the Office of External 
Affairs) about the proper use FEMA’s name and logo in their name and their publicity 
materials. FERG Liaisons must obtain legal review from OCC to ensure that the use of 
the agency’s name and logo comply with agency policy and the Standards of Ethical 
Conduct for Employees of the Executive Branch, 5 C.F.R. Part 2635. 

2.  FERGs are not authorized to speak on behalf of FEMA or DHS. 

3.  FERGs are not authorized to use DHS’s or FEMA’s name or logo during public events 

without approval from the Office of External Affairs. 

Page 6 

 
 
 
 
 
H.  Employees may be granted a de minimus amount of duty time to participate in FERG 

activities. Employees who wish to spend more than a de minimus amount of time on FERG 
activities, may extend their working day by a corresponding amount of time, use annual 
leave, compensatory time or credit hours if available, or Leave Without Pay. The actual 
number of hours granted to employees may vary depending upon the nature and frequency 
of the activity. Supervisors must approve the amount of time granted for FERG activities 
beforehand. The approved amount of time an employee may engage in an FERG is not 
appealable or grievable. 

I.  Participation in a FERG or any FERG activities shall not cause the employee to be entitled 

to overtime or premium pay. 

J.  FERGs are subject to audits by OCCHCO, OER, DHS, the Office of Personnel 

Management, the Government Accountability Office, or any other authorized entity. FERGs 
are responsible for producing any required reports or documentation upon request. 

V.  Exclusions from Policy 

Outcome: Employees understand the types of activities excluded from this Directive. 

A.  This policy does not apply to: 

1.  Official work groups; 

2.  Affinity groups (i.e., Blacks in Government, Federally Employed Women, League of 

United Latin American Citizens); 

3.  Credit unions;  

4.  Informal groups (e.g., hospitality/condolence committees, sunshine funds, etc.); 

5.  Unions; 

6.  Organizations of former FEMA employees; or 

7.  Any organization whose membership is primarily comprised of FEMA supervisory or 
managerial personnel with whom the establishment of a consultative relationship is 
required by 5 C.F.R. § 251.201 (e.g., the Professional Managers Association, the Senior 
Executives Association, the Federal Managers Association, or any organization with 
whom FEMA’s relationship is established or prescribed by statute, regulation, or other 
law). 

VI. FERG Prohibitions 

Outcome: FERGs have established limits on the types of activities they may conduct. 

A.  The name of the FERG may not include the word “Association” or “Fund”. 

B.  A FEMA FERG may not advocate for issues concerning wages, hours, or any other term or 

condition of employment. 

C.  FERGs shall not act as a representative of complaints and grievances against the agency. 
If an employee raises a complaint or a grievance, FERGs shall refer any such complaints 
or grievances to the proper FEMA office in accordance with FEMA policy. 

Page 7 

 
 
 
 
 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION 

REVIEW CYCLE 

FEMA Directive 112-10, FEMA Employee Resource Groups, will be reviewed, reissued, 
revised, or rescinded within four years of the issue date. 

AUTHORITIES 

A.  Title 18, United States Code §§ 205 and 208. 

B.  Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.) Parts 251 and 2635. 

C.  Title 5, C.F.R. § 251.202. 

D.  Executive Order 12731 (Oct. 17, 1990): Principles of Ethical Conduct for Government 

Officers and Employees. 

E.  DHS Directive 112-6, Employee Associations. 

F.  FEMA Directive 126-10, Process for Approval to Host or Participate in Conferences. 

G.  FEMA Manual 122-1-1: Travel Policy. 

H.  FEMA Manual 123-10-01: Absence and Leave Policy. 

I.  FEMA Manual 106-1-1: Scheduling of Work. 

J.  FEMA Manual 253-2-1: Premium Pay Policy. 

REFERENCES 

A.  DHS Management Directive 123-07, Limitation on Purchase and Use of Branded 

Merchandise. 

MONITORING AND EVALUATION 

OCCHCO and OER will monitor and review the process for FERGs and take any necessary 
actions to revise this directive and/or ensure conformity with the directive. 

QUESTIONS 

Direct questions to the Human Capital Customer Relations at FEMA-HC-
ServiceDesk@FEMA.DHS.gov or 866-896-8003. 

Page 9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SAMPLE FEMA EMPLOYEE RESOURCE GROUP CHARTER TEMPLATE 

APPENDIX 

I. 

Purpose 

The FEMA Employee Resource Group (FERG) is established in partnership with the Diversity 
Management Advisory Council (DMAC), with the primary objective to support the development 
and implementation of Diversity and Inclusion programs and policies in relation to the group’s 
community. The purpose of the FERG is to provide a forum for diverse voices to discuss 
issues related to the groups’ shared characteristics. In alignment with Agency’s commitment to 
its principles of excellence and core values: compassion, fairness, integrity, and respect, this 
FERG enhances the Agency’s broader diversity and inclusion goals through employee 
engagement, recruitment & professional development, retention, and guiding effective 
outreach to the diverse communities it represents. 

II. 

Scope 

The FERG serves as advisor to the DMAC and the Office of Equal Rights (OER) on diversity 
issues related to the group’s community with the goal of ensuring that FEMA achieves its 
global Diversity Vision: “An inclusive environment in which the Agency leverages diversity to 
achieve mission goals and business objectives and to maximize the potential of individuals and 
the organization.” 

The FERG: 

A.  Supports FEMA leadership and the DMAC in achieving FEMA’s global Diversity Vision and 

related goals; 

B.  Provides visibility, networking, and peer support connections to group’s individuals 

throughout the agency; 

C.  Serves as a “change agent” focused on fostering a “culture of diversity” related to group’s 

issues and community cross FEMA through visible commitment and frequent 
communication and by advocating for group’s diversity to be a key factor in organizational 
planning, recruitment, hiring, and workforce development decisions, and retention 
initiatives; and 

D.  Partners with DHS groups, other Federal Agency Affinity, Employee Associations, and 

Employee Resource Groups associated with the group’s community. 

III. 

Related Authorities 

A.  DHS Directive Number 112-06 Employee Associations 

B.  Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 251, “Agency Relationships with Organizations 

Representing Federal Employees and Other Organizations” 

C.  DHS 065-02-001 Equal Employment Opportunity Special Emphasis Programs 

Page 10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
D.  United States Department of Homeland Security, Federal Emergency Management 

Agency, Diversity Management Advisory Council Charter 

IV. 

Policies 

A.  The FERG’s interests and activities shall extend, to the extent practicable, to all FEMA 

Offices and Directorates. 

B.  The FERG shall be nonpartisan and not-for-profit, and shall be supported by contributions 
from its members and, to the extent available and appropriate, by contributions or other 
funding from FEMA or from other individuals or groups. 

C.  The FERG shall not itself discriminate in any of its activities on the basis of race, color, 
creed, sexual orientation, gender identity, religion, national origin, age, marital status, 
political affiliation, disabling condition, or membership in a labor organization. 

D.  The FERG will comply with Federal ethics and DHS ethics policy. 

E.  The FERG will prohibit members from engaging in the use of DHS or FEMA franking 

privileges for US Mail. 

F.  The FERG shall exist to conduct activities of interest to its members, as determined 

through the democratic processes outlined below. 

G.  The FERG shall not act as a representative of complaints and grievances against the 

agency. If an employee raises a complaint or a grievance, the FERG shall refer any such 
complaints or grievances to the proper FEMA office in accordance with FEMA policy. 

V. 

Membership and Structure 

Membership: The FERG is comprised of any and all employees and volunteers who wish to 
participate. Participation is voluntary and on the employee’s time. Membership is open to all 
employees and shall remain fluid, with participation at the team member’s discretion.  

Senior Executive Service (SES) Sponsor: The FERG has at least one SES sponsor who will 
ensure the group has a direct conduit to senior leadership and the DMAC. 

A.  Qualifications: 

1.  Holds a position in senior leadership as a career SES member. 

2.  Is interested in supporting the interests of the FERG. 

B.  Responsibilities: 

1.  Serve as leading voice and advocate for the FERG both nationally and amongst peers. 

2.  Provide guidance to and actively engage with peers throughout organization to gain 

input and to promote the group’s annual goals and progress. 

3.  Make decisions on behalf of the FERG and suspend any activities and behavior not 

aligned with or in support of agency principles or business objectives. 

Page 11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
National Co-Sponsors: The FERG will have two or more National Co-Sponsors. Co-Sponsors 
will provide leadership, guidance, and support them by using their influence to promote group 
participation throughout the organization. Co-Sponsors ensure that the larger issues, 
concerns, successes and trends related to the group are addressed.  

A.  Qualifications: 

1.  Holds a management level (GS 14 and above) employee position at one of the Regions, 

facilities or as part of National Headquarters. 

2.  Approved by the SES sponsor. 

B.  Responsibilities: 

1.  Provide guidance and counsel to the FERG steering committee. 

2.  Consult with the SES sponsor and other internal diversity groups to discuss trends, 

issues and opportunities. 

3.  Ensure all discussions, meetings and activities support the business objectives and 
communicate FEMA business needs and areas of focus to the steering committee. 

Steering Committees: The FERG will have a Steering Committee comprised of members 
from different Directorates and from various geographic locations. The steering committee 
should elect or appoint two co-chairs who lead and coordinate meetings and activities.  

A.  Qualifications: 

1.  Must be an active member the FERG. 

2.  Must be able to give at least two hours per month to committee member activities (i.e., 

meetings, projects). 

3.  Must have supervisor’s support to participate as committee member. 

B.  Responsibilities: 

1.  Increase awareness of the FERG across all sectors of the Agency. 

2.  Promote active engagement of members via Facebook, Intranet, quarterly calls and/or 
local meetings with the FERG, and advise on follow-up needed regarding issues or 
questions raised in discussion. 

3.  Participate in routine calls and/or meetings of the Steering Committee as needed. 

4.  Plan and implement activities and initiatives of the FERG.  

5.  Act as first point of access to the FERG membership at large; advise and consult on 

potential strategies for leveraging groups as a resource in supporting objectives outlined 
by the DMAC.  

6.  Collaborate with other DHS or Federal Agency groups. 

Secretary: The FERG will have a Secretary who is appointed by the SES sponsor or elected 
by the members.  

A.  Qualifications: 

Page 12 

 
 
 
 
 
1.  Must be an active member of the FERG. 

2.  Must be able to give at least two hours per month to FERG meetings. 

3.  Must have supervisor’s support to participate in the FERG. 

B.  Responsibilities: 

1.  Keep minutes of all general meetings. 

2.  Maintain all official organizational records, including the membership records. 

3.  Notify members and, to the extent possible, other interested individuals of all meetings 
and activities, and circulate minutes, agendas, and other pertinent documents as 
appropriate and practicable. 

4.  Perform such other duties as the SES sponsor may specify from time to time. 

Office of the Chief Component Human Capital Officer (OCCHCO) and Office of Equal 
Rights (OER): The FERG will be assigned a liaison from representing from OCCHCO or OER. 
The Liaison will provide support to the FERG, be a resource for general diversity information, 
and communicate important issues between DMAC and steering committee. 

VI.  Membership 

A.  Membership is open to all employees and volunteers who wish to participate. 

B.  FERG participation is often personal and private matters, and all decisions about sharing 

such information must be made by the individual involved. To that end:  

1.  The FERG official membership list will be maintained by the FERG Secretary or other 

designee in strict confidence, and will be used solely for internal organizational 
purposes. The list of FERG members should include a list of member names, program 
office, official duty station, and contact information. The Secretary or other designee 
may make aggregated or otherwise anonymous membership information available to 
the general membership, but shall make information concerning individual members 
available only to the SES sponsor or the National Co-Sponsors, the FERG Liaisons, 
and only when necessary for the discharge of their organizational duties. 

2.  The Secretary shall in addition maintain a list containing the names of and a means of 
contacting the SES sponsor, and all current members of the National Co-Sponsors, 
which shall be available to all members and to the public. Information concerning 
individual members shall not be made available in any other way or to any other person 
without the specific written consent of each individual involved. 

3.  It is the responsibility of all officers and members to maintain the confidentiality of other 
members, fellow employees, or other individuals who attend meetings or participate in 
other FERG activities. 

C.  FERG members will not accept gratuities or any other benefits, directly or indirectly, from 

sellers of goods or services doing or soliciting business with the association. 

Page 13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
D.  FERG members shall not accept special discounts, unless those discounts are available (or 

the chance at receiving those discounts) to all members. 

E.  Membership dues for the FERG, if applicable, will be assessed on an equal basis for all 

members if and when established.  

VII. 

Leadership Position Elections 

A.  The FERG shall hold a general meeting in January of each year for the purpose of electing 
National Co-Sponsors, Steering Committee members, and a Secretary. Candidates may be 
nominated by any voting member (including themselves). The election of the National Co-
Sponsors shall take place before the election of positions. All positions will be elected by 
simple majority. Unsuccessful candidates for National Co-Sponsors may thereafter run for 
election to other available positions. 

B.  Members shall be entitled to vote for a number of candidates for election as National Co-

Sponsors equal to the number of positions to be filled, but no member may cast more than 
one vote for any one candidate. Candidates shall be elected to vacant positions in the order 
determined by the number of votes that they receive. In the event that more candidates 
receive an equal number of votes than there are remaining vacant positions, the outcome 
shall be decided by run-off among those candidates. 

C.  Each position will serve one year terms. 

D.  No officer may serve more than four consecutive terms in the same position. An officer may 

be removed from office with the concurrence of the SES sponsor. When any office 
becomes vacant before the end of a normal term through resignation, removal or 
otherwise, that office may be filled for the remainder of the term by the SES sponsor. 

E.  Current politically appointed Federal employees may not serve as FERG officials. 

F.  Elected officials within the FERG shall be prohibited from accepting compensation for their 

service to the FERG. 

VIII.  Voting 

A.  At any meeting of the membership, the presence (in person or remotely) of five members 
shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of transacting any normal business, and action 
may be taken by a majority vote of those present (in person, remotely, or by proxy) at the 
meeting. 

B.  Any action involving significant change to the structure or ongoing operation of the FERG, 

as determined by the SES sponsor (but in any event including all elections and any 
amendment of this Charter), may be taken only: 

1.  After no less than 21 days' notice to all voting members listed on the official 

membership list maintained by the Secretary or other designee in accordance with the 
general nature of the proposed action and the time and place of the meeting at which it 
is to be considered; 

Page 14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.  By a meeting at which at least sixty percent of the voting members listed on the official 
membership list referred to above are present in person, remotely, or by proxy; and 

3.  In the case of amendments to this Charter, by a vote of two-thirds of the members 

present and voting (in person, remotely, or by proxy). 

C.  At any meeting, a voting member may attend and vote either in person, remotely, or by 

proxy. Any such proxy shall be in writing, shall be limited in time and purpose to a specific 
meeting of the membership (or any postponement, continuation or adjournment thereof), 
and shall specify in reasonable detail the particular matters on which the individual granted 
the proxy shall be entitled to cast the absent member's vote. 

IX. 

Responsibilities and Objectives 

In furtherance of the FERG’s purpose, all activity and initiatives will support the following value 
points: 

A.  Continued Networking 

1.  Serve as a mechanism to connect employees with one another and to promote 

participation in and engagement with the group.  

2.  Actively increase awareness of the FERG among employees in all lines of business. 

3.  Connect members in order to support and be supported by others from a shared 

background. 

B.  Professional Development 

1.  Serve as a vehicle through which members can have access to professional 

development opportunities.  

2.  Promote internal mentoring to develop diverse talent. 

3.  Support retention initiatives. 

C.  Diversity and Inclusion Initiative Enhancement 

1.  Improve and endorse the visibility of diversity both within and outside of the Agency.  

2.  Identify opportunities to improve external perception of FEMA amongst internal or 

external communities. 

3.  Promote cultural awareness through education and training events that specifically 

target the identified needs of the community. 

4.  Assist with monitoring agency policies, practices, and procedures to identify barriers to 

full participation, possible systemic forms of discrimination and barriers to equal 
opportunity in employment activities of the group’s individuals, and provide OCCHCO, 
OER, and the DMAC with recommendations for corrective action. 

5.  Provide subject matter expertise from outside the typical EEO/civil rights arena, via a 

diverse pool of group employees and ally employees. 

Page 15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
6.  Serve as a point of contact for supervisors, managers, and employees seeking to 

support the group’s employees. 

7.  Serve as a resource to the agency for improving disaster services to the group’s 

survivor population.  

X. 

Meetings and Communication 

Led by their Co-chairs, group members may decide the frequency of their formal meetings, 
calls or other communications, with a minimum of once per quarter. Since group membership 
extends beyond organizational groupings or regional proximity, a majority of the group 
communication will occur virtually. Employees may represent themselves as individuals while 
engaging in group communication. Only those officially authorized will speak on behalf of the 
agency in an official capacity. The FERG will operate virtually through venues such as 
Facebook groups, conference calls, webinars, group emails, and Intranet.  

In locations where the workforce is sufficiently large, the FERG members will be encouraged to 
host localized events or meetings. The frequency and type of gatherings will be determined by 
the members in consultation with the respective SES sponsor, National Co-Sponsors, and the 
Steering Committee. 

XI. 

Reporting 

Upon request by OCCHCO, OER, the DMAC, or any FEMA governing body the group’s SES 
sponsor, National Co-Sponsors, and/or the Steering Committee Co-chairs will be required to 
provide reports and periodic reviews of group activity, communication, or conduct. Proper 
notice and a desired focus for the report and review will be provided. 

_______________________________ 
Corey J. Coleman 
Chief Component Human Capital Officer 
Office of the Chief Component Human 
Capital Officer 
Date: __________________________ 

_______________________________ 
Adrian Sevier 
Chief Counsel 
Office Chief Counsel 
Date: __________________________ 

_______________________________ 
Regis Phelan 
Acting Director 
Office of Equal Rights 
Date: __________________________ 

Page 16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Foreword 

The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) is committed to providing a work 
environment that is conducive to the successful accomplishment of FEMA’s mission, 
goals, and objectives, while providing for family-friendly work arrangements to the 
greatest extent possible.  While responding to emergencies and disasters nationwide 
frequently requires the undivided attention and personal sacrifice of employees, we 
must support our families in every possible way so they can support us when we need 
to help others.  The effective use of flexible work schedules, as well as overtime work 
and compensatory time, supports this endeavor.  FEMA Instruction 106-1-1, Scheduling 
of Work, outlines the policy and provides guidance for the Agency in promoting a 
flexible and effective workforce. 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Foreword ......................................................................................................................... 1 

Table of Contents 

 GENERAL INFORMATION ..................................................................... 4 

  Purpose ................................................................................................................ 4 

  Applicability and Scope ........................................................................................ 4 

  Supersession ........................................................................................................ 4 

  Authorities............................................................................................................. 4 

  References ........................................................................................................... 4 

  Policy .................................................................................................................... 5 

  Definitions ............................................................................................................. 5 

  Responsibilities ..................................................................................................... 8 

  Reporting Requirements ..................................................................................... 10 

  Forms Prescribed ............................................................................................... 10 

  Questions ........................................................................................................... 10 

 TRADITIONAL WORK SCHEDULES ................................................... 11 

  General ............................................................................................................... 11 

  Requirements ..................................................................................................... 11 

  Credit Hours ....................................................................................................... 11 

  Premium Pay ...................................................................................................... 11 

 FLEXIBLE WORK SCHEDULES .......................................................... 12 

  General ............................................................................................................... 12 

  Requirements ..................................................................................................... 12 

  FWS Available to FEMA Organizations .............................................................. 12 

  Requesting a FWS ............................................................................................. 13 

  Credit Hours ....................................................................................................... 13 

  Limitations on Earning Credit Hours ................................................................... 13 

  Accumulation, Forfeiture, and Compensation of Credit Hours ............................ 14 

  Premium Pay ...................................................................................................... 14 

 COMPRESSED WORK SCHEDULES .................................................. 15 

  General ............................................................................................................... 15 

  Requirements ..................................................................................................... 15 

  Requesting a CWS ............................................................................................. 15 

2 

 
 
  Temporary Change in Scheduled Day Off .......................................................... 16 

  Credit Hours ....................................................................................................... 16 

  Premium Pay ...................................................................................................... 16 

 WORK SCHEDULE ADJUSTMENTS ................................................... 17 

  Administrative Dismissals ................................................................................... 17 

  Variations in Work Schedules for Educational Purposes .................................... 17 

  Altering Work Schedules .................................................................................... 17 

  Procedures for Terminating AWS ....................................................................... 18 

 HOLIDAYS ............................................................................................ 19 

  Designation of Holidays ...................................................................................... 19 

"In lieu of" Holidays ............................................................................................. 19 

  Holidays and Work Schedules ............................................................................ 20 

  Presidential Closing of Agencies ........................................................................ 20 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GENERAL INFORMATION 

  Purpose 

This Instruction establishes policies and procedures for the scheduling of work 
and the use of traditional and alternative work schedules within FEMA. 

  Applicability and Scope 

This Instruction applies to all FEMA organizations and to employees who meet 
the definition of "employee" under title 5 United State Code (U.S.C.) § 2105.  
This Instruction does not apply to:   

1.  Employees who occupy firefighter positions and are scheduled to work up to 

144 hours per pay period; or  

2.  Employees who occupy police officer positions. 

  Supersession 

This Instruction supersedes FEMA Manual 106-1-1, Scheduling of Work issued 
March 5, 2014.   

  Authorities 

A.  5 U.S.C. Chapter 61, “Hours of Work” 

B.  5 U.S.C. § 3401(2), “Definitions – part-time career employment” 

C.  5 U.S.C. § 5504, “Biweekly pay periods; computation of pay” 

D.  5 U.S.C. §§ 5542, 5543, 5544  

E.  29 U.S.C. §§ 201-219 

F.  The Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (Stafford 

Act) Pub. L. No. 93-288, as amended, 42 U.S.C. §§ 5121 et seq. 

G.  5 Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.) Part 610 “Hours of Duty” 

H.  5 C.F.R. Part 550 “Pay Administration (General),” Subpart A, “Premium Pay” 

I.  5 C.F.R. Part 551 “Pay Administration under the Fair Labor Standards Act,” 

Subpart D, “Hour of Work” and Subpart E, “Overtime Pay Provisions” 

  References 

A.  Department of Homeland Security (DHS) Management  Directive 254-04, 

Alternative Work Schedules, issued May 31, 2007 

B.  U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) Handbook on Alternative Work 

Schedules (see http://www.opm.gov/oca/aws/index.asp) 

C.  OPM Fact Sheet:  Credit Hours Under a Flexible Work Schedule (see 

http://www.opm.gov/policy-data-oversight/pay-leave/work-schedules/fact-
sheets/credit-hours-under-a-flexible-work-schedule) 

4 

 
D.  OPM Fact Sheet:  Lunch or Other Meal Periods (see 

http://www.opm.gov/policy-data-oversight/pay-leave/work-schedules/fact-
sheets/lunch-or-other-meal-periods/) 

E.  FEMA Manual 123-10-1, Absence and Leave Policy, December 29, 2015 

F.  FEMA Manual 253-2-1, Premium Pay, February 11, 2014 

G.  The President’s Memorandum on Expanding Family-Friendly Work 

Arrangements in the Executive Branch, 59 Fed.Reg. No. 135 (July 15, 1994)  

H.  The President’s Memorandum Implementing Federal Family Friendly Work 

Arrangements (June 21, 1996) 

I.  Exec. Order No. 11,582, Observance of holidays by Government agencies, 

February 11, 1971   

J.  DHS Delegation No. 03000, Delegation for Human Capital and Human 

Resources, June 5, 2012 

  Policy 

Program Heads of FEMA organizations are delegated authority to determine 
appropriate work schedules, in accordance with this Instruction and applicable 
law, to implement within their respective work units.  FEMA organizations may 
establish written procedures consistent with this Instruction and in coordination 
with the Office of the Chief Component Human Capital Officer.  To the extent 
FEMA organizations require a schedule that deviates from the schedules outlined 
in this Instruction, they must coordinate with the Office of the Chief Component 
Human Capital Officer and the Office of Chief Counsel to ensure compliance with 
applicable law.  

  Definitions 

A.  Administrative dismissal.  An order issued by an authorized official relieving 

employees from duty without charge to leave or loss of pay.     

B.  Administrative workweek.  Any period of seven consecutive 24-hour periods 
designated in advance.  At FEMA the administrative workweek is Sunday 
through Saturday. 

C.  Alternative work schedules (AWS).  FEMA policy supports the use of both 

flexible work schedules and compressed work schedules. 

D.  Bargaining unit employee.  A member of a group of employees with common 

interests who are represented by a labor union. 

E.  Basic workweek.  For full-time employees, it is generally a 40-hour workweek, 
Monday through Friday, that does not extend more than six of any seven 
consecutive days.  For part-time employees, it is generally a set number of 
hours between 16 and 32 that does not extend beyond six consecutive days.  
5 C.F.R. §§ 610.102 and 610.111.     

5 

 
F.  Basic work requirement.  The number of hours, excluding overtime hours, an 
employee is required to work or otherwise account for by approved leave.  5 
U.S.C. § 6121(3).   

G.  Biweekly pay period.  The pay period for an employee covers two 

administrative work weeks.  5 U.S.C. § 5504(a). 

H.  Business hours.  Office hours of operation for a FEMA fixed facility 

established by the head of that facility.  For example, at FEMA Headquarters, 
business hours are 8:30 a.m. - 5:00 p.m.  Employees on a traditional work 
schedule generally work the business hours.   

I.  Compressed work schedule (CWS).  A work schedule established with 

approval by the employee’s supervisor that: 

1.  For a full-time employee, has an 80-hour biweekly basic work requirement 

scheduled for fewer than 10 workdays.   

2.  For a part-time employee, has a biweekly basic work requirement of 64 

hours or less scheduled for fewer than 10 workdays. 

J.  Core hours.  The designated hours during the workday, work week, or pay 

period that are within the tour of duty during which an employee covered by a 
flexible work schedule is required to be present for work.  FEMA’s core hours 
are between 9:30 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. (local time).  5 U.S.C § 6122(a).   

K.  Credit hours.  Those hours within a flexible work schedule, approved in 
advance, that an employee works in excess of his or her basic work 
requirement so as to vary the length of a workweek or workday.  5 U.S.C. § 
6121(4).  An employee on a CWS or a traditional work schedule shall not 
earn credit hours. 

L.  Flexible time band.  The hours before and after core hours on a flexible work 
schedule during which employees may choose their arrival and departure 
times and earn credit hours.  FEMA’s flexible time bands are 6:00 - 9:30 a.m. 
and 3:30 - 8:00 p.m. (local time).  5 U.S.C. § 6122(a)(2). 

M.  Flexible work schedule (FWS).  A work schedule established with approval by 

the employee’s supervisor that: 

1.  In the case of a full-time employee, has an 80-hour biweekly basic work 

requirement that allows an employee to determine his or her own 
schedule within the limits set by FEMA’s business and core hours. 

2.  In the case of a part-time employee, has a biweekly basic work 

requirement of 64 hours or less that allows an employee to determine his 
or her own schedule within the limits set by FEMA’s business and core 
hours. 

N.  Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) exempt employee.  An employee who is not 
covered by the minimum wage and overtime provisions of the FLSA.  See 29 
U.S.C. § 213; 5 C.F.R. § 551.202.  Several categories of employees are 
exempt from the FLSA.  Although OCCHCO ultimately determines which 

6 

 
employees are not covered by the FLSA, these exemptions generally apply to 
employees with managerial responsibilities, positions requiring specialized 
knowledge in areas such as science or law, or positions requiring 
independent judgment. 

O.  FLSA nonexempt employee.  An employee who is covered by the minimum 

wage and overtime provisions of the FLSA.  See 29 U.S.C. § 213; 5 C.F.R. § 
551.202. The FLSA applies to individuals employed by the United States 
Government and governs compensation and work schedules unless the 
employee is determined to be exempt. 

P.  Irregular or occasional overtime.  Overtime that is approved after the 
beginning of the administrative workweek in which it is performed.  

Q.  Lunch or meal break period.  Work schedules of employees required to work 
more than five hours per workday must include a 30-minute unpaid lunch or 
meal break period.  A FEMA organization or work unit may modify this 
requirement to meet operational needs.  This unpaid lunch or meal break 
period may be extended to a maximum of one hour provided the workday is 
correspondingly extended.  Lunch or meal break periods may not be 
scheduled at the beginning or end of the workday.  Because employees 
receive no compensation for lunch or meal break periods, they must be 
entirely free of the duties of their positions during this period.  An employee 
may not work through the lunch or meal break period in order to extend paid 
time or to otherwise modify his or her established schedule.    

R.  Organization.  FEMA program offices, directorates, etc., whose leadership 
reports directly to the Administrator, Deputy Administrator, or Regional 
Administrator.   

S.  Overtime hours.  See FEMA Manual 253-2-1, Premium Pay. 

1.  With respect to traditional work schedules: 

a.  For FLSA exempt employees, overtime hours are all hours worked in 
excess of eight hours per day or 40 hours per week that are officially 
ordered and approved in advance by their supervisor. 

b.  For FLSA nonexempt employees, overtime hours are all hours worked 

in excess of eight hours per day or 40 hours per week that the 
supervisor has reason to believe are being performed and fails to 
prevent.    

2.  With respect to FWS programs, overtime hours are hours worked in 

excess of the employee’s tour of duty officially ordered in advance, but do 
not include credit hours.   

3.  With respect to CWS programs, overtime hours are hours worked in 

excess of those hours which constitute the CWS.    

T.  Program Head. A management official such as an Associate Administrator, 

Assistant Administrator, Regional Administrator, and/or Office Chief. 

7 

 
U.  Regularly scheduled administrative workweek.  The period an employee is 

regularly scheduled to work within an administrative workweek (i.e., a period 
of seven consecutive 24-hour periods designated in advance).       

V.  Regularly scheduled overtime.  Overtime that is approved in advance of the 

employee’s regularly scheduled administrative workweek.   

W. Tour of duty.  The hours of a day (a daily tour of duty) and the days of an 

administrative workweek (a weekly tour of duty) that constitute an employee’s 
regularly scheduled administrative workweek.   5 C.F.R. § 610.102.   

X.  Traditional work schedules (TWS).  The basic workweek, in the absence of an 

AWS, during which employees are required to be on duty within the 
administrative workweek.  Generally, the work schedule for employees on a 
TWS coincides with the business hours of the facility.     

Y.  Work unit.  An entity within a FEMA organization with a specific function, 
homogeneous procedures or technology, and headed by a supervisor 
authorized to approve employees’ time and attendance reports and leave 
requests. 

  Responsibilities 

A.  The FEMA Administrator is responsible for ensuring that work schedules are 
established to accomplish FEMA’s mission and meet organizational goals.  
The FEMA Administrator is responsible for making determinations pursuant to 
5 U.S.C. § 6101(a).   

B.  The Office of the Chief Component Human Capital Officer (OCCHCO) is 

responsible for: 

1.  Coordinating with FEMA organizations to ensure work schedules are in 

compliance with this Instruction and applicable law; 

2.  Providing technical advice and guidance on TWS and AWS policies and 

procedures to supervisors, employees, and timekeepers; 

3.  Conducting periodic evaluations of AWS programs throughout FEMA; 

4.  Making recommendations to the Administrator to modify or terminate a 

particular AWS; 

5.  Ensuring negotiation occurs with exclusive representatives of bargaining 

units on AWS policies and procedures; and 

6.  Coordinating with the Office of Chief Counsel (OCC) to provide legal 
review of work schedules to ensure compliance with applicable law. 

C.   Program Heads are responsible for: 

1.  Coordinating with OCCHCO to ensure work schedules are in compliance 

with this Instruction and applicable law; 

2.  Ensuring that work schedules are established to accomplish FEMA’s 

mission and meet organizational goals; 

8 

 
3.  Approving or disapproving participation in AWS for organizational work 

units or groups of employees assigned to identifiable functions within their 
organization; 

4.  Ensuring that TWS and AWS are administered in a fair and equitable 

manner for all employees within their organizational elements, including 
approving or disapproving exceptions for individual employees; and 

5.  Ensuring that an AWS established within their organization does not 

interfere with the Agency’s mission, strategic plan, or organizational goals. 

D.  Supervisors are responsible for: 

1.  Establishing and approving work schedules of all employees within the 

work unit; 

2.  Modifying, suspending, or terminating an employee’s work schedule as 

necessary to meet the operational needs of the work unit;  

3.  Maintaining accurate work schedule records for all employees within the 

work unit; 

4.  Ensuring adequate staff coverage during business hours; 

5.  Ensuring compliance with all of the procedures and requirements of this 

Instruction; 

6.  Ensuring that FLSA non-exempt employees only work during their 

scheduled tours of duty unless overtime work is specifically directed and 
authorized (FEMA Manual 253-2-1, Premium Pay);   

7.  Determining whether an employee may be excepted from a CWS or 
reassigned because of personal hardship.  5 U.S.C § 6127(b)(2)(B);  

8.  Providing written notification to employees of the approval or disapproval 
of requests for work schedule changes and an explanation when changes 
are denied; 

9.  Except in emergency situations, providing written advance notification to 
employees when it is necessary to suspend or change work schedules 
due to operational needs; 

10. Reviewing work schedules to ensure that the duties and requirements of 

employees' positions are fulfilled; 

11. Certifying, for each employee, the accuracy of hours worked, including 

any overtime, in FEMA’s time and attendance system; 

12. Initiating an investigation and/or disciplinary action against an employee 
for failure to comply with Agency policy and/or the provisions set forth in 
this Instruction; and    

13. Providing timekeepers with information and documentation concerning 
work schedules of employees to include any approved overtime or 
compensatory time off.  

9 

 
E.   Employees are responsible for: 

1.  Making a written request for supervisory approval of a work schedule by 

completing FEMA Form 106-1-1-1, Request for Work Schedule;   

2.  Adhering to their approved work schedules until changed or terminated or 

requesting appropriate leave;  

3.  Complying with the provisions set forth in this Instruction and the 

established work schedule procedures of the organization and work unit to 
which they are assigned; 

4.  Accurately recording and verifying their daily attendance; and 

5.  Submitting requests to use leave as far in advance as possible. 

F.  Timekeepers are responsible for: 

1.  Recording and reporting employee time and attendance in accordance 

with FEMA policy;   

2.  Maintaining time and attendance files for each employee, including a copy 

of approved work schedules for employees who are on AWS; 

3.  Completing leave audits; and 

4.  Providing timekeeping guidance and updates to employees. 

  Reporting Requirements 

OCCHCO will report data related to scheduling of work as required by DHS and 
OPM. 

  Forms Prescribed 

FEMA Form 106-1-1-1, Request for Work Schedule 

  Questions 

Questions concerning scheduling of work should be addressed to OCCHCO at 
(202) 646-3962. 

10 

 
 
 
TRADITIONAL WORK SCHEDULES 

  General 

This chapter contains procedures and requirements for and associated with 
TWS.  Unless an AWS has been established by the organization or work unit, the 
default schedule for FEMA employees is a TWS.  

  Requirements 

A.  TWS have a basic work week (typically five consecutive days Monday 

through Friday, but may be six of any seven consecutive days) during which 
employees are required to be on duty within the administrative workweek 
(Sunday through Saturday). 

B.  TWS workdays consist of:  

1.  For full-time employees, eight hours per day, 40 hours per week; and    

2.  For part-time employees, between 16 and 32 hours per week and, eight or 

fewer hours per day on five or fewer days per week.   

C.  Generally, full-time employees on TWS are required to perform work during 

the business hours of the FEMA facility to which they are assigned.  Business 
hours include a 30-minute unpaid lunch or meal break period during which 
employees are not permitted to perform work.  To meet operational needs, 
employees on TWS may be required to work outside the facility’s business 
hours.   

D.  Part-time employees on TWS are required to perform work during the 

business hours of the FEMA work unit (at the location) to which they are 
assigned, including a 30-minute unpaid lunch or meal break period if working 
more than five consecutive hours.  

E.  Employees on TWS must work their scheduled work hours or otherwise 

account for their time by using approved leave. 

  Credit Hours 

Employees on TWS may not earn credit hours. 

  Premium Pay  

See FEMA Manual 253-2-1, Premium Pay. 

11 

 
 
 
FLEXIBLE WORK SCHEDULES 

  General 

This chapter contains procedures and requirements for and associated with 
FWS.  Program Heads of FEMA organizations and work units may establish 
additional procedures and requirements consistent with this Instruction.  

  Requirements 

A.  FWS consist of a basic workweek (usually five consecutive days Monday 

through Friday) during which employees are required to be on duty within the 
administrative workweek (Sunday through Saturday).  FWS workdays have 
core hours and flexible hours.  

B.  Core hours are the designated period of the day the employee must be 

present at work.  FEMA’s designated core hours are 9:30 a.m. - 3:30 p.m. 
(local time). 

C.  Flexible hours are those hours worked within two “flexible time bands” on 

either side of the core hours.  Employees on FWS must choose their tour of 
duty within these flexible time bands, but they must be present during the 
core hours.  Depending on the FWS, an employee’s arrival time may be 
limited because the employee must be present during the core hours.        

1.  The AM flexible time band is 6:00 a.m. - 9:30 a.m., Monday through 

Friday, unless changed temporarily by the head of a FEMA organization or 
work unit for a specified purpose.   

2.  The PM flexible time band is 3:30 p.m. – 8:00 p.m., Monday through 

Friday, unless changed temporarily the head of a FEMA organization or 
work unit for a specified purpose.  

D.  Supervisors must approve work schedules using FEMA Form 106-1-1-1, 

Request for Work Schedule. 

E.  Program Heads of FEMA organizations may authorize, with OCCHCO 
approval, different core hours and flexible time bands for a specific 
organization or work unit to meet organizational needs. 

F.  Employees under a FWS may earn up to two credit hours per day between 

the hours of 6 a.m. and 8 p.m. subject to supervisory approval.  See Section 
3-5 on Credit Hours. 

G.  During core hours, employees must be working or otherwise account for their 

time by using approved leave. 

  FWS Available to FEMA Organizations 

A.  The establishment or termination of a FWS in a work unit in which there are 
bargaining unit employees is subject to the terms of the collective bargaining 
agreement.  See 5 U.S.C. § 6130(a).  

B.  FEMA organizations or specific work units without bargaining unit employees 

may offer the following FWS to their employees:  

12 

 
C.  Flexitour is a FWS in which a full-time employee has a basic work 

requirement of eight hours in each day and 40 hours in each week and 
selects arrival and departure times within the flexible time bands subject to 
supervisory approval.   

D.  Maxiflex is a FWS that contains core hours on fewer than 10 workdays in the 
biweekly pay period.  The employee may vary the number of hours worked on 
a given workday or the number of hours each week within the limits 
established by the organization or work unit.  In FEMA, the maximum number 
of work hours permitted in a daily tour of duty is 11.5 hours. 

  Requesting a FWS 

Employees may request to voluntarily participate in any FWS offered within their 
organization or work unit.  Employees requesting a FWS must: 

1.  Prepare a written request by completing FEMA Form 106-1-1, Request for 

Work Schedule and forward it to their supervisor for approval; and 

2.  Work during the approved work period or otherwise account for their time 

by using approved leave. 

  Credit Hours 

A.  Credit hours are any hours within a FWS that are in excess of an employee's 
basic work requirement (e.g., 40 hours a week), that the employee elects to 
work to vary the length of a workweek or a workday.   

B.  Supervisors must approve the earning and use of credit hours in advance. 

C.  Employees on a FWS may earn credit hours when work is available in excess 
of their normal duty hours.  Credit hours are voluntary and employee-initiated, 
whereas overtime hours are ordered and management-initiated.   

D.  Credit hours do not constitute overtime work and may not be converted to 
overtime or compensatory time or otherwise entitle employees to premium 
pay.   

  Limitations on Earning Credit Hours 

A.  Credit hours may be earned only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 

p.m., Monday through Friday.  

B.  Credit hours may be earned in quarter-hour increments, up to a maximum of 

two hours per day and 24 hours per pay period.   

C.  Supervisors may limit or restrict the earning and use of credit hours.  

Supervisors may not advance credit hours, that is, time cannot be charged 
against credit hours until credit hours have been earned.   

D.  Credit hours may not be earned during periods of travel or training.  See 5 

U.S.C. § 6121(4) and OPM Fact Sheet:  Credit Hours under a Flexible Work 
Schedule. 

E.  A full-time employee may not carry more than 24 credit hours to the next pay 

period.   

13 

 
F.  A part-time employee may not carry more than one fourth of the hours in his 
or her biweekly schedule to the next pay period.  5 U.S.C. § 6126(a).  For 
example, a part-time employee whose schedule requires the employee to 
work 50 hours per pay period may not carry more than 12.5 credit hours to 
the next pay period. 

G.  OPM regulations prohibit Senior Executive Service (SES) members from 
accumulating credit hours under AWS programs.  5 C.F.R. § 610.408.  

  Accumulation, Forfeiture, and Compensation of Credit Hours 

A.  Credit hours accumulated in excess of 24 hours at the end of any pay period 
are immediately and irrevocably forfeited without compensation or right to 
restoration. 

B.  Employees will be compensated at their current rate of basic pay for credit 

hour balances upon: 

1.  Termination of a FWS; 

2.  Change to a non-FWS; or 

3.  Separation from FEMA. 

C.  Credit hours worked each day must be recorded in WebTA and approved by 

the employee’s supervisor.   

  Premium Pay 

See FEMA Manual 253-2-1, Premium Pay.   

14 

 
 
 
COMPRESSED WORK SCHEDULES 

  General 

This chapter contains procedures and requirements for and associated with 
CWS.  Program Heads of organizations or work units may establish additional 
procedures and requirements consistent with this Instruction. 

  Requirements 

A.  A CWS is a fixed schedule that consists of an 80 hour biweekly basic work 

requirement scheduled for fewer than 10 workdays.   

1.  A full-time employee is required to work 80 hours in a biweekly pay period.  
This work must be scheduled for fewer than 10 days in a biweekly pay 
period. 5 U.S.C. § 6121(5)(A).  

2.  A part-time employee works 64 hours or fewer in a biweekly pay period.  
This work must be scheduled for fewer than 10 workdays in a biweekly 
pay period.  5 U.S.C. § 6121(5)(B).  

B.  The establishment or termination of a CWS in a work unit in which there are 
bargaining unit employees is subject to the terms of the collective bargaining 
agreement.  5 U.S.C. § 6130(a).  

C.  FEMA organizations or specific work units without bargaining unit employees 
may offer CWS (e.g., 5/4-9 or 4-10) to their employees.  Program Heads of 
FEMA organizations, with OCCHCO approval, may develop a CWS to meet 
the operational needs of their organizations and/or work units. 

D.  FEMA organizations or specific work units without bargaining unit employees 
may establish a mandatory CWS, provided that the majority of the employees 
vote to be included in the CWS.  5 U.S.C. § 6127(b)(1). 

E.  Employees may request in writing to be excepted from a CWS or reassigned.  
The organizational head and supervisor must consider such a request and, if 
the CWS would impose a personal hardship on such employee, the head of 
the organization and supervisor must except the employee from a CWS or 
reassign the employee.  5 U.S.C. § 6127(b)(2).  

  Requesting a CWS 

A.  Employees may request to voluntarily participate in any CWS offered within 

their organization or work unit.  Employees requesting a CWS must: 

1.  Select arrival and departure times for each day in the biweekly pay period; 

and 

2.  Prepare a written request by completing FEMA Form 106-1-1-1, Request 

for Work Schedule and forward it to their supervisor for approval. 

B.  The employee’s supervisor must approve the selection of the non-workday in 

connection with the request for a CWS. 

15 

 
  Temporary Change in Scheduled Day Off 

A.  If the supervisor determines that the employee must work on his or her 

scheduled day off:  
1.  The employee may be paid overtime or granted compensatory time, as 

appropriate, for the hours worked in excess of the CWS; or 

2.  The supervisor may direct the employee to temporarily change his or her 

day off to another workday during the same pay period.   

B.  An employee may request a temporary change in his or her scheduled day off 
and that day may be changed or traded for another workday during the same 
pay period with advance approval of the supervisor. 

  Credit Hours 

Employees under a CWS may not earn credit hours.  5 U.S.C. § 6121(4). 

  Premium Pay 

See FEMA Manual 253-2-1, Premium Pay.   

16 

 
 
 
 
  
 WORK SCHEDULE ADJUSTMENTS 

  Administrative Dismissals 

A.  An administrative dismissal order may be issued when: 

1.  Normal operations of an establishment are interrupted by events beyond 

the control of management or employees;  

2.  For managerial reasons, the closing of an establishment or portions 

thereof is required for short periods;  

3.  It is in the public interest to relieve employees from work to participate in 
civil activities which the Government is interested in encouraging; or  

4.  The circumstances are such that an administrative order is not appropriate 
under 1, 2, or 3 above, and the Agency, under its regulations, excuses 
without charge to leave or loss of pay, employees paid on an annual 
basis.  See 5 C.F.R. §§ 610.303 and 610.305. 

B.  The authority to issue an administrative dismissal may only be used for brief 
periods, generally not exceeding three consecutive workdays in a single pay 
period.  See 5 C.F.R. § 610.302.   

  Variations in Work Schedules for Educational Purposes 

A.  Program Heads of FEMA organizations may authorize a special tour of duty 

of not less than 40 hours to allow an employee to take one or more courses in 
a college, university, or other educational institution as long as: 

1.  The course is not considered "training" under 5 U.S.C. Chapter 41; 

2.  The rearrangement of the employee's schedule will not interfere with the 

work needed to be accomplished; 

3.  Additional costs for personal services will not be incurred; and 

4.  Completion of the course will enhance the employee's work performance.  

See 5 C.F.R. § 610.122(a).  

B.  FEMA may not pay an employee premium pay solely because the special 
tour of duty causes him or her to work on a day, or a portion of a day, for 
which premium pay would otherwise be paid.  See 5 C.F.R. § 610.122(b). 

  Altering Work Schedules 

A.  Modification, suspension, or termination of an employee’s work schedule may 

be necessary to meet operational needs. Situations that may require 
modification, suspension,  or termination of an employee’s work schedule 
include: 

1.  Unexpected staff vacancies; 

2.  Disaster activities; 

17 

 
 
 
 
3.  Travel away from official duty station; 

4.  Participation in training; 

5.  Assignment on task force; 

6.  Participation in preparedness exercise; and 

7.  Other situations or emergencies where adjustment is deemed necessary 

by the supervisor. 

B.  Supervisors will notify employees in writing in advance of the upcoming 
administrative workweek of changes in their work schedule.  When the 
schedule change is required to meet operational needs, employees will be 
notified as far in advance as possible.   

C.  Employees may request changes to their work schedules by submitting a 

written request to their supervisor at least two weeks prior to the date of the 
requested change.   

D.  Changes in work schedules may not be made in order to create an 

entitlement to payment or to avoid an obligation for granting leave, holiday 
pay, or premium pay.  Except in emergency situations, changes to work 
schedules will be made effective on the first day of a pay period. 

E.  Employees may grieve supervisory-initiated work schedule adjustments and 
denial of an employee’s request for work schedule changes through the 
Agency’s administrative grievance procedure.  Bargaining unit employees 
must use negotiated agreement procedures, where applicable. 

  Procedures for Terminating AWS  

A.  If the head of the Agency finds that a particular AWS has had an “adverse 

agency impact,” the Agency must promptly discontinue the AWS.  5 U.S.C. § 
6131(a)(2).  

B.  Adverse agency impact is defined as: 

1.  A reduction of the Agency’s productivity; 

2.  A diminished level of services furnished to the public; or   

3.  An increase in the cost of agency operations (other than an administrative 

cost to process the establishment of an AWS program).  5 U.S.C. § 
6131(b).   

C.  If establishment of the AWS was negotiated, the Agency may reopen the 
agreement to seek its termination.  5 U.S.C. § 6131(c)(3).  If an impasse 
results, the dispute goes to the Federal Services Impasses Panel.  The Panel 
will decide within 60 days whether the Agency’s determination is supported by 
evidence.  If it is, the Panel must act in favor of the Agency.  5 U.S.C. §§ 
6131(c)(3)(B) and (C).  The AWS may not be terminated until the agreement 
covering the AWS is renegotiated or expires or terminates pursuant to the 
terms of that agreement or the Panel renders its final decision after an 
impasse during the renegotiation process.  5 U.S.C. § 6131(c)(3)(D).  

18 

 
  Designation of Holidays 

HOLIDAYS 

A.  Holidays are determined based on the provisions of 5 U.S.C. § 6103 and 
Executive Order No. 11582, Observance of holidays by Government 
agencies, February 11, 1971.  

B.  The following are legal public holidays: 

1.  New Year's Day, January 1 

2.  Birthday of Martin Luther King, Jr., the third Monday in January 

3.  Washington's Birthday, the third Monday in February 

4.  Memorial Day, the last Monday in May 

5.  Independence Day, July 4 

6.  Labor Day, the first Monday in September 

7.  Columbus Day, the second Monday in October 

8.  Veterans Day, November 11 

9.  Thanksgiving Day, the fourth Thursday in November 

10. Christmas Day, December 25 

11. Inauguration Day, January 20 of each fourth year for those federal 

employees working in the District of Columbia metropolitan area.  (When 
January 20 of any fourth year falls on Sunday, the next succeeding day 
selected for the inauguration of the President is a legal public holiday.) 

"In lieu of" Holidays   

A.  Only full-time employees, including those on FWS or CWS, are entitled to an 
"in lieu of" holiday when a holiday falls on an employee’s non-workday.  In 
such cases, the employee's holiday is the workday immediately preceding his 
or her non-workday.  For example, when the holiday occurs on a Saturday, 
the Friday immediately before is a legal holiday for those employees whose 
basic workweek is Monday through Friday.  In the case of an employee on 
CWS, the “in lieu of” holiday would become the day preceding his or her non-
workday.   

B.  There are three exceptions: 

1.  If the non-workday is Sunday, the next basic workday is the "in lieu of" 

holiday; 

2.  If Inauguration Day (for employees working in the District of Columbia and 

the immediate surrounding areas) falls on a non-workday, e.g., a 
Saturday, there is no provision for an "in lieu of" holiday; and 

19 

 
 
 
 
 
3.  The Agency head may determine that a different "in lieu of" holiday is 
needed to prevent an "adverse agency impact," and he or she may 
designate a different "in lieu of" holiday for full-time employees under 
CWS. 

  Holidays and Work Schedules 

Employees who are not required to work on a holiday receive their rate of basic 
pay for the applicable number of holiday hours, in accordance with the following 
work schedules: 

A.  Full time employees: 

1.  Employees under a TWS are generally excused from 8 hours of non-

overtime work. 

2.  Employees under a FWS are credited with 8 hours towards their 80 hour 
basic work requirement for the pay period, even if they would otherwise 
work more hours on that day. 

3.  Employees under a CWS are generally excused from all of the non-

overtime hours they would otherwise work on that day.  

B.  Part time employees: 

A part-time employee is entitled to a holiday when the holiday falls on a day 
when he or she would otherwise be required to work or take leave. This does 
not include overtime work. 

  Presidential Closing of Agencies 

The President occasionally issues an Executive Order closing Federal 
departments and agencies for all or part of a workday.  Employees are excused 
from duty during such periods unless they are "emergency employees," as 
determined by the Agency.  Such Executive Orders often provide that the time off 
will be treated like a holiday for pay and leave purposes.  Employees who are 
required to work during their basic tour of duty on such days are entitled to 
holiday premium pay.  See FEMA Manual 253-2-1, Premium Pay for further 
information.   

20 

 
 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
       Directives Management System 

Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) 

Date 
6/12/13 

I. 

Purpose 

Superior Qualifications and Special Needs Pay Setting  

Organization  
 OCCHCO 

This Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) establishes procedures and provides guidance 
for the  superior qualifications and special needs pay setting authority in accordance with 
the regulations issued by the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) in 5 CFR Part 531 
Subpart B.  A newly appointed employee may be authorized a salary above the minimum 
rate (Step 1) based on superior qualifications or on a special need of the Agency for the 
candidate’s services.  This authority is intended to enhance the Agency’s ability to 
compete for top quality candidates. 

II. 

Supersession 

This SOP supersedes SOP 05-001, Procedures for Requesting and Establishing a Salary 
at a Rate Above the Minimum Rate of the Appropriate General Schedule Grade, dated 
March 22, 2005. 

III.  Coverage 

The Agency may use a superior qualifications  or special needs appointment for 
employees newly appointed to General Schedule positions or for employees reappointed 
to such positions, as specified in 5 CFR 531.203 (b)(2). 

IV.  References 

A.  Public Law 101-509, Federal Employees Pay Comparability Act of 1990 (FEPCA), 

Section 101(a) and Section 106. 

B.  Title 5, United States Code, section 5333 

C.  Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Part 531.212, Superior Qualifications 

and Special Needs Pay-Setting Authority 

D.  Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Part 532.403(b), New Appointments 

V. 

Definitions 

A. Agency:   For the purpose of this SOP, the term “Agency” refers to FEMA. 

B. Special Need:  A documented need of the Agency for a specific set of skills and/or 
expertise that are relevant to the requirements of the position and are essential to 
accomplishing an important Agency mission, goal, or program activity. A candidate may 
also meet the special needs criteria by meeting the Agency workforce needs, as 
documented in the FEMA strategic human capital plan.  

C. Newly Appointed: First appointment as an employee in the Federal Government, 
regardless of tenure, or a subsequent appointment after a break in Federal service of at 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
least 90 days, excluding a break in service following a temporary appointment or 
employment under the Student Educational Employment Program. 

VI.  Responsibilities 

A.  Hiring Officials: 

1.  Determine if a superior qualifications or special needs request will be submitted 

for a candidate. 

2.  Work with the Human Resources Liaison to develop the superior qualifications or 

special needs request. 

B.  Human Resources Liaisons: 

1.  In conjunction with the hiring official, prepare the written recommendation for 
superior qualifications or special needs pay authority with the appropriate 
supporting documentation. 

2.  Justify the request for superior qualifications or special needs pay authority. 

3.  Submit the request for superior qualifications or special needs pay authority to the 

Office of the Chief Component Human Capital Officer.  

C.  Human Resources Specialists: 

1.  Evaluate each request against relevant statutory, regulatory, and policy guidance 

to ascertain whether it meets established criteria. 

2.  Make an initial determination whether the request and supporting documentation 
contain sufficient justification for superior qualifications or special needs pay 
authority. 

3.  Forward the initial determination, request, and supporting documentation to the 

Chief Component Human Capital Officer or his/her designee for final review and 
approval. 

4.  Inform the Human Resources Liaison and hiring official of the 

approval/disapproval.  

5.  Ensure processing of the Standard Form (SF) 52, Request for Personnel Action, in 
accordance with the Office of Personnel Management’s Guide to Processing 
Personnel Actions and Guide to Personnel Data Standards. 

6.  Maintain a record of superior qualifications or special needs pay appointments in 

a separate centralized file within the office. 

VII.  Standard Operating Procedures 

A.  Superior Qualifications or Special Needs Determination 

1.  Superior qualifications appointments will be to journeyman level or senior level 

positions. Superior qualifications for entry level positions may only be considered 
when a candidate possesses education or experience in a unique specialty that is 
needed by the Agency in which it is hard to find high-quality candidates or in 
meeting a special Agency need. 

2.  Prior to a candidate entering on duty, the hiring official will determine if a request 
above the minimum rate of the grade (step 1) will be made for a newly appointed 
employee. The request will be based on superior qualifications or special needs. 

 
 
 
a.  Superior Qualifications: The hiring official may determine that a candidate 

has superior qualifications based on the level, type, or quality of the 
candidate’s skills or competencies demonstrated or obtained through 
experience and/or education, the quality of the candidate’s accomplishments 
compared to others in the field, or other factors that support a superior 
qualifications determination. 

b.  Special Needs: The hiring official may determine that a candidate fills a 

special need if the type, level, or quality of skills and competencies or other 
qualities and experiences possessed by the candidate are relevant to the 
requirements of the position and are essential to accomplishing an important 
mission, goal, or program activity. An example of a special need of the 
Agency is a manpower shortage in a particular occupation or a program which 
is unique to the Agency. 

3.  The hiring official will determine whether a recruitment incentive could meet the 
need, instead of the appointment at the higher step of the grade. This is important 
because a recruitment incentive is a one-time payment, while an appointment at a 
higher step is permanent. 

B.  Pay Rate Determination 

1.  An attempt will be made to maintain equity between the pay of the new appointee 
and that of current employees doing comparable work. Decisions to pay the first 
step should be based on a variety of factors which include, but are not limited to, 
post graduate degrees relating to the position being filled, professional licenses, 
exceptional work experience, etc.  When a decision is made to pay higher than the 
step 1, it should be based on the fact that the credentials are not commonly 
available in the workforce. 

2.  The hiring official, will consider one or more of the following factors, as 

applicable in the case at hand, to request a higher than minimum rate of pay using 
the superior qualifications or special needs pay-setting authority. 
a.  Level, type, or quality of the candidate’s skills or competencies. 
b.  Candidate’s existing salary, recent salary history, or salary documented in a 

competing job offer (taking into account the location where the salary was or 
would be earned and comparing the salary to payable rates of basic pay in the 
same location). 

c.  Significant disparities between the Federal and non-Federal salaries for the 

skills and competencies required in the position to be filled. 

d.  Existing labor market conditions and employment trends, including the 
availability and quality of candidates for the same or similar positions. 

e.  Success of recent efforts to recruit candidates for the same or similar 

positions. 

f.  Recent turnover in the same or similar positions 
g.  The importance/criticality of the position to be filled and the effect on the 

Agency if it is not filled or if there is a delay in filling it. 

h.  The desirability of the geographic location, duties, and/or work environment 

associated with the position. 

i.  FEMA’s workforce needs as documented in the strategic human capital plan. 
j.  Other relevant factors. 
C.  Required Approval and Documentation 

1.  Written documentation to authorize a rate above the minimum rate must be made 

before a candidate enters on duty in the position to which appointed. 

 
2.  The Human Resources Liaison, in conjunction with the hiring official, will 

prepare a written memorandum requesting a rate above the minimum rate of the 
grade (step 1), based on superior qualifications or special needs.  

3.  The written memorandum  will address the following factors: 

a.  The superior qualifications of the candidate or the special agency need for the 

candidate’s services which justifies a higher than minimum rate; 

b.  An explanation of the factor(s) and supporting documentation which were 
used to justify the rate at which the employee’s pay is set. The written 
documentation must explain how the factors directly relate to the rate  
requested; 

c.  The reasons for requesting a higher than minimum rate instead of or in 

addition to a recruitment incentive. 

4.  The memorandum requesting the superior qualifications or special needs pay 
authority will be signed by the hiring official and will require approval by the 
Office Head, Associate Administrator or Regional Administrator. 

5.  The Human Resources Liaison will submit the following to the Office of the 

Chief Component Human Capital Officer: 
a.  Signed memorandum that documents the justification of the superior 
qualifications appointment or special needs pay setting approval. 

b.  Current position description for the job being filled. 
c.  Candidate’s resume for Federal employment in which the selection was based. 
d.  Vacancy announcement advertising the position and identification of other 

recruitment sources used. 

e.  Copies of all certificates issued to the selecting official for consideration. 
f.  Copy of the candidate’s supporting documentation (e. g. latest earnings 

statements, previous year’s W2, Wage and Tax Statement) verifying salary 
history. 

6.  The Human Resources Specialist will review the written request and supporting 

documentation and make an initial determination.  

7.  The Human Resources Specialist will prepare a decision memorandum for the 

Chief Component Human Capital Officer or his/her designee. The memorandum 
will include the Human Resources Specialist’s recommendation to approve or 
disapprove and the factors considered. 

8.  The Human Resources Specialist will submit the superior qualifications or special 
needs request, supporting documentation, and decision memorandum to the Chief 
Component Human Capital Officer or his/her designee. 

9.  The Chief Component Human Capital Officer or his/her designee will review the 
written justification and supporting documentation from the Program Office and 
the recommendation from the Human Resources Specialist and make a final 
determination. 

10. The Human Resources Specialist will document approved superior qualifications 
or special needs requests on the SF-52, Request for Personnel Action as indicated 
in the Office of Personnel Management’s Guide to Processing Personnel Actions 
and Guide to Personnel Data Standards. 
a.  Block 29 – Pay Rate Determination – 7 Superior Qualifications Rate 
b.  Remarks – P04 – Pay set using the superior qualifications and special needs 

pay setting authority under 5 CFR 531.212. 

 
11. The Human Resources Specialist will maintain a separate record for each superior 
qualifications or special needs appointment. The record will be maintained in a 
centralized location within the Recruitment and Staffing Branch. The 
documentation will be sufficient enough to allow the action to be reconstructed 
from the record.  

12. Each record will document the superior qualifications of the candidate or the 
special need of the Agency for the candidate’s services; an explanation of the 
factors and supporting documentation considered to justify the rate at which the 
pay was set; an explanation of how the considered factors directly relate to the 
rate approved; and the reasons for authorizing an advanced rate instead of or in 
addition to a recruitment bonus. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FORMAL WRITTEN COMPLAINT 

DISCRIMINATION AND HARASSMENT AT FEMA 

1.  Your name, address, and telephone number; 

a.  Max J Meindl 
b.  5 E Austin, Bellville, Texas 77418 
c.  832-293-3671 

2.  A short description of the events that you believe were discriminatory (for example, you were terminated, 

demoted, harassed); 

I am being targeted by leadership for special attention. 

a. 
b.  Retaliation FOR WRITING A COMPLAINT OUTLING MY CONCERNS TO THE OFFICE Chief of Staff, Sandra 

Cooley. 
c.  Harassment 
d. 
e. 

I am being denied promotional opportunities 
I feel as if I am being harassed for pointing out the inexperience of FEMA middle management and the 
way they treat their employees. 
I am being harassed because of my disability and health conditions and pointing out to management 
their misinterpretation of the FMLA when they tried to stop me from doing reduced hours per the law. 
I haD a very problematic heart surgery in April 2019 and FEMA management has been less than 
understanding in my recovery process from several chronic conditions. 

f. 

g. 

h.  They are judiciously papering the file to imply deficiencies in my performance while at the same time 
the State of Texas is requesting my being assigned to complex applicants based upon my performance 
ability in moving applicant forward in the grant process. 

i.  This is personal with someone in leadership. 
j.  For example, I was written up for copying and pasting a technical response from a co-worker in an 

answer to another co-worker.  As an individual with paralegal experience I would never paraphrase a 
deposition so why would I paraphrase a technical response in an email.  These are legal and permanent 
files that are part of the recovery process.  I have sent several thousand emails over the course of the 
disaster and management picks to write me up on so they can paper a trail that inevitably, as they plan, 
will lead to having me terminated or not renew my contract. 
Individuals with 1/5th my experience are being offered promotions when I am the only one in the office 
with the required/mandated FEMA appropriate training classes and an open task book for the position.  
These individuals come to me for advice on their applicants. 

k. 

l.  As the record from a congressional hearing stipulates: HEARING BEFORE THE 
SUBCOMMITTEE  ON  OVERSIGHT  AND  MANAGEMENT  EFFICIENCY  OF THE 
COMMITTEE  ON  HOMELAND  SECURITY  HOUSE  OF  REPRESENTATIVES  ONE  HUNDRED  FIFTEENTH  C
ONGRESS  FIRST  SESSION  JULY  27,  2017  Serial No. 115–25  

m.  “Also is morale an issue for FEMA? Measuring morale, FEMA is ranked 284th out of 305 agency 

subcomponents, which means that the agency index scores fall well below average. The FEMA work force 
expressed dissatisfaction with agency leadership, their fairness of performance reviews, and 
opportunities for professional development.  Research shows that effective leadership is the key driver of 
employee satisfaction. In order to improve employee morale, FEMA must provide robust training to new 
supervisors, motivate and engage employees, and recognize, of course, high performers.” 

n. 

 
 
3.  Why you believe you were discriminated against (for example, because of your race, color, religion, sex 

(including pregnancy, gender identity, and sexual orientation), national origin, age (40 or older), disability, 
genetic information or retaliation); 

a.  Age, medical condition, filing a complaint, FMLA request, reasonable accommodation request, speaking 
my mind when I observe inappropriate middle management “orders” or decisions, that violate policy 
and procedures, which by the way, we are encouraged to do by the current administrator, Pete Gaynor. 

4.  A short description of any injury you suffered.  

a.  Hard to determine but I abhor having to go to work now-a-days and feel constantly harassed, written up 
over nonsensical issues, performance is not recognized, no opportunity to grow or be promoted to 
positions I am qualified for and could be compensated at a higher level.  The stress is not good for my 
health in any way shape or form.  A toxic worksite for me. 

• 

Your signature (or your lawyer's signature). 

 
 
ATTACHMENTS 

From: Alexander, Dennis <dennis.alexander@fema.dhs.gov> 
Sent: Thursday, February 27, 2020 11:58:35 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>; White, Richard <richard.white@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov>; Dyson, Robert <Robert.Dyson@fema.dhs.gov>; 
Richardson, Derek <derek.richardson.2@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: TFL Reassignment  

 Max, 

 Leadership decides who they want in any given position. Currently you are trending toward deficiency in 
two critical areas of your performance and until they have been addressed and sustained improvement 
demonstrated I will not support as supervisor detail assignments or promotions. To be clear once you have 
improved in these areas and have my support as your supervisor there is no guarantee you will be 
selected.   

But again, Sr. Leadership using their on consistently applied criteria will make their selections about 
various positions. 

V/R 

Dennis 

Dennis J. Alexander, P.E. 
Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
Disaster DR4332 TX-- Harvey 
TRO TX Harris County Branch II 
8223 Willow Place Drive South 
Houston, TX 77070 
281-897-2017 Desk Phone 
737-230-8182 Cell Phone 
979-885-8256 Alternate Cell 
Dennis.alexander@fema.dhs.gov 

 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
 
 
From: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>  
Sent: Tuesday, February 25, 2020 1:54 PM 
To: White, Richard <richard.white@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Alexander, Dennis <dennis.alexander@fema.dhs.gov>; Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: TFL Reassignment 

Any idea why I never get the TFL opportunity? 
I’m the only one in the office who’s taken the TFL training, has an open TFL Task Book and has over 31 months of 
experience as compared to 6-8 months for everyone else. 
Am I being purposefully blackballed from performing TFL activities? 
I definitely have more experience and time in the seat so to speak. 
Highly unfair and improper. 

GUESS WHO’S THE TFL’S 

COMPLETE RTM 
Staff Name 

Completed 
Tasks 

Incomplete 
Tasks 

MEINDL, MAX 
Emmers, Michael G. 
Heath, Tywon A. 

9 
1 
1 

Total 

Overdue 

0 
0 
0 

0 
0 
0 

On Hold w/ 
RFI 
0 
0 
0 

Average 
Days to 
Complete 
Task 

% Tasks 
Completed 
before 
Deadline 

0 
0 
0 

100% 
100% 
100% 

PDMG REVIEW SCOPE 
COST 
Staff Name 

Completed 
Tasks 

Incomplete 
Tasks 

Total 

Overdue 

MEINDL, MAX 
Heath, Tywon A. 
Emmers, Michael G. 

70 
12 
2 

0 
1 
1 

0 
1 
1 

REVIEW AND COMPLETE 
EEI 
Staff Name 

Completed 
Tasks 

Incomplete 
Tasks 

Average 
Days to 
Complete 
Task 

% Tasks 
Completed 
before 
Deadline 

2.3 
3.1 
31 

89% 
83% 
0% 

On Hold w/ 
RFI 
0 
0 
0 

MEINDL, MAX 
Heath, Tywon A. 
Emmers, Michael G. 

VERIFY RFI 
Staff Name 

Total 

Overdue 

259 
44 
8 

0 
10 
0 

0 
10 
0 

On Hold w/ 
RFI 
0 
0 
0 

Completed 
Tasks 

Incomplete 
Tasks 

Total 

Overdue 

On Hold w/ 
RFI 

Average 
Days to 
Complete 
Task 

% Tasks 
Completed 
before 
Deadline 

1.6 
3.3 
11.5 

96% 
75% 
88% 

Average 
Days to 
Complete 
Task 

% Tasks 
Completed 
before 
Deadline 

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
63 
4 
1 

0 
0 
0 

0 
0 
0 

0 
0 
0 

0.4 
7 
0 

98% 
75% 
100% 

Completed 
Tasks 

Incomplete 
Tasks 

Total 

Overdue 

499 
117 
13 

4 
10 
6 

3 
10 
5 

On Hold w/ 
RFI 
0 
0 
2 

Average 
Days to 
Complete 
Task 

% Tasks 
Completed 
before 
Deadline 

11.9 
5.7 
8.2 

67% 
79% 
69% 

MEINDL, MAX 
Heath, Tywon A. 
Emmers, Michael G. 

CONFIRM EEI 
Staff Name 

MEINDL, MAX 
Heath, Tywon A. 
Emmers, Michael G. 

REVIEW DDD 
Staff Name 

Average 
Days to 
Complete 
Task 

% Tasks 
Completed 
before 
Deadline 

0.8 
4.9 
7.6 

93% 
57% 
63% 

On Hold w/ 
RFI 
0 
0 
0 

Average 
Days to 
Complete 
Task 

% Tasks 
Completed 
before 
Deadline 

10.8 
2.4 
3 

75% 
92% 
100% 

On Hold w/ 
RFI 
0 
0 
0 

Completed 
Tasks 

Incomplete 
Tasks 

Total 

Overdue 

MEINDL, MAX 
Heath, Tywon A. 
Emmers, Michael G. 

151 
23 
16 

4 
7 
0 

4 
6 
0 

COMPLETE SCOPE 
COSTING 
Staff Name 

Completed 
Tasks 

Incomplete 
Tasks 

Total 

Overdue 

MEINDL, MAX 
Heath, Tywon A. 
Emmers, Michael G. 

160 
13 
3 

1 
0 
1 

1 
0 
1 

___________________________________ 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
From: femamax@gmail.com <femamax@gmail.com>  
Sent: Thursday, February 27, 2020 12:07 PM 
To: 'Alexander, Dennis' <dennis.alexander@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: DEFICIENCY 

I understand your position Dennis but I do have a different perspective of my performance. 

To condemn me to purgatory over 2 emails out of several thousand that I have sent reeks of pettiness at a 
minimum. 

You know what is going on here so we’ll let sleeping dogs lie. 

My performance has been effective as indicated below but everyone can tell a story the way they wish. 

Appreciate your kind and professional feedback. 

(Note to EEOC, see attached document) 

Max 

“No act of kindness, no matter how small, is ever wasted.” ― Aesop 

“A spoon cannot taste of the food it carries. Likewise, a foolish man cannot understand the wise man´s wisdom even if he 
associates with a sage.” – Dalai Lama 

 
 
 
 
From: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Sent: Wednesday, October 30, 2019 9:06:35 AM 
To: Cooley, Sandra <Sandra.Cooley@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: femamax@gmail.com <femamax@gmail.com> 
Subject: RE: FMLA Recertification - M. Meindl  

 Ms. Cooley, 

Thank you so very much for the clarification. 
I hope to have the recertification done this week or early next week, based upon current medical issues/assessments 
although, I have been scheduled for additional CAT scans and associated testing. 
The scope of the medical issues is evolving but I very much appreciate having a workload that keeps me busy and 
distracted from my physical issues, although my morning startup is a bit challenging. 
I try to be here by 8:30 – 09:00 and work until 4:30 or 5:30 to ensure I get my full 8 hours in. 
This year, with all of the unpaid leave, has put a definite stress on the family and the finances. 
I appreciate you kind and detailed response to my concerns. 
___________________________________ 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

   
  
 
 
From: Cooley, Sandra <Sandra.Cooley@fema.dhs.gov>  
Sent: Wednesday, October 30, 2019 7:17 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: femamax@gmail.com; Cooley, Sandra <Sandra.Cooley@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: FMLA Recertification - M. Meindl 

Max, 

Thank you for reaching out. I want you to know that your Supervisor, Tim Wick is working hard to ensure 
he takes care of and supports all of his employees. At this Tim is only attempting to ensure that you have a 
updated FMLA in place nothing more. Next he will reassess the workload of all staff performing the same 
work and each person is contributing  to the workload in a manner consistent with the requirements of their 
assigned position. He will make the necessary adjustments to ensure the workload is properly distributed in 
a manner which provides equity to his employees and efficiency of support to customers. Any employee 
carrying too much will have the work reduced and any employee not carrying enough will have the work 
increased. Employees who need FMLA or Reasonable Accommodations will be supported without 
exception. However this does not mean that we will reduce the quantity or quality of the work to be 
performed. Employees who need to take leave will be required to manage their workload and not allow their 
absences to impact their customers or put a burden on their co-workers to cover for them. Tim’s approach of 
each employee being held accountable to perform the work assigned is a little different than his previously 
approach. In the past Tim when employees called in at the last minute he assigned others to cover for them 
in the new approach he will assign others to cover and then have the absent employee cover for the other 
employee to keep the workload distributed equally. This approach is not designed to make anyone feel 
singled out but rather to create a work environment where the expectation is that each employee contributes 
toward the mission consistent in regards to quality and quantity of work performed.   

Please be patient as we go through this process of supporting Tim and other TRO Supervisors who have 
been so driven from a JFO perspective to just get the work done that as we shift to more of a fix cite 
operational posture we have to also foster a work environment which supports high performing teams where 
everyone contributes with or without an accommodation or FMLA.  

I hope this email helps to clarify your understanding.   

Sandra A. Cooley 
Acting Chief of Staff/Deputy Chief of Staff 
Field Leadership Chief of Staff – Type 1 
Texas Recovery Office – Harvey  
M:  202.805.6761 
E:  sandra.cooley@fema.dhs.gov  

Sincerely,  
Your Signature Block  

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
From: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>  
Sent: Tuesday, October 22, 2019 4:48 PM 
To: Cooley, Sandra <Sandra.Cooley@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: femamax@gmail.com 
Subject: FW: FMLA Recertification - M. Meindl 

Ms. Cooley, 
I am forwarding this email to you for information purposes. 
I have no problem doing the FMLA recertification, subject to the time issues and making appointments. 
What concerns me is that I feel as if I have been singled out for special attention. 
The who of that issue is subject to a bit of detective work but I know who has questioned me in the past. 
If I wasn’t doing my job, that would be one thing but I am doing it and I do it well. 
If you have any insight or words of encouragement.. send them on. 

Be well. 

___________________________________ 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.   
It may contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).   
The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is 
not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

  
  
  
   
  
 
 
From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, October 22, 2019 4:22 PM 
To: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov>; David, Patricia <Patricia.David@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Wick, Timothy <Timothy.Wick@fema.dhs.gov>; TERRY, DETRA S. <DETRA.TERRY@FEMA.DHS.GOV>; Alexander, 
Dennis <dennis.alexander@fema.dhs.gov>; brent@guerradays.com; FEMA-EqualRights <FEMA-
EqualRights@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: FMLA Recertification - M. Meindl 

JG, 
My next appointment with the VA is 10/29/2019 with the ENT (ear, nose, throat) group at the DeBakey VA hospital to 
attempt to ascertain the source for my recurring dizzy spells. 
My next appointment with my primary care physician is next Feb, 2020. 
My next appointment with my pulmonary care specialist for my COPD (Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease) is also 
next year. 
I will do an online request to see my primary at the Katy VA outpatient clinic, but I’m not sure if that can happen 
within 15 days, it is the VA, so nothing is for certain. 
I will also attempt to get an appointment with my primary care private physician in Bellville. 
I must admit that as an senior citizen and as an individual who has identified, in the onboarding process, as an 
individual with a disability and when factoring in the very problematic heart surgery and subsequent associated health 
issues, I am concerned about the way the institution and/or individuals within the institution, treat those identified as 
disabled, more specifically, myself.   
If my work was lacking, maybe I could understand, but it isn’t and I don’t understand.   
It does seem that personalities have drifted in to the equation, in my opinion. 
I appreciate your assistance and efforts with my disability and during my recovery but, I must admit that it has been 
an extremely distasteful experience with other FEMA personnel. 
 I will endeavor to get the paperwork returned in a timely manner but I am concerned about the 15 day window. 
 Please advise. 
 ___________________________________ 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  
  
 
 
From: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov>  
Sent: Tuesday, October 22, 2019 3:13 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Wick, Timothy <Timothy.Wick@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FMLA Recertification - M. Meindl 

Good afternoon Max,  
On May 1, 2019 you were initially approved for FMLA due to a serious/chronic health condition.  Given that it has 
now been more than thirty (30) calendar days since your last medical update for your current FMLA condition, I am 
requesting that you provide me with an FMLA recertification as it relates to your current FMLA condition of 
record.  The recertification is now necessary to ensure that the workload on your team can be planned and managed 
effectively while assisting you during your time of recovery.  Therefore, I am requesting that you work with your 
physician to respond to all questions where appropriate especially those related to the questions identified below. 
These questions are not separate and apart from the recertification form but can be responded to within the context of 
the questions already provided on the form.  (29 CFR 825.308(a), permits recertification every 30 days for chronic or 
permanent/long-term conditions.)   
Purpose of this FMLA Recertification Update: 
  1. To validate if you are continuing to see the physician for the specific condition listed on your FMLA application 
dated and signed by your physician, on 4/11/2019.       
  2.  Request that you provide an estimate of the duration of your condition & if you will be incapacitated for a single 
continuous period of time.  (See questions #1 & #4). 
  3.  Request that you specify what dates, if any, you will have planned appointments within the next 30 days. (See 
Question #5) 
  4.  Request that your physician state whether or not you require care on an intermittent or reduced schedule basis, 
including any time for recovery.  (See Question #6) 
  5.  Request that your physician provide an estimate of when you will have flare-ups during your recovery period (if 
known) that will prevent you from performing your job functions. (See question #7). 
Your health remains of paramount concern to me as well as our mission.  My goal remains to work cooperatively with 
you and your physician in a manner which affords you the best opportunity to recover and return to full time 
employment status.  However, failure to provide this requested FMLA Recertification information within fifteen (15) 
working days of receipt will result in the denial of any FMLA related leave until the information is provided.  
If you experience difficulty providing this information within the specified period, please see me, or in my absence 
Patricia David, and provide a brief written statement documenting your hardship and your request for extension will 
be responded to within three (3) working days. 
Regards, 

Jacqueline Gause, MSc 
Human Resources 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Department of Homeland Security 
Hurricane Harvey-DR4332-TX 
Texas Recovery Office  
Houston, TX 
Mobile: 202-322-6241 

  
  
  
  
  
 
 
From: Cooley, Sandra <Sandra.Cooley@fema.dhs.gov>  
Sent: Tuesday, October 22, 2019 5:09 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: femamax@gmail.com 
Subject: Re: FMLA Recertification - M. Meindl 

Let me review your concerns and circle back Max.  Appreciate the opportunity to review. 

From: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Sent: Tuesday, October 22, 2019 4:47:59 PM 
To: Cooley, Sandra <Sandra.Cooley@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: femamax@gmail.com <femamax@gmail.com> 
Subject: FW: FMLA Recertification - M. Meindl  

Ms. Cooley, 
I am forwarding this email to you for information purposes. 
I have no problem doing the FMLA recertification, subject to the time issues and making appointments. 
What concerns me is that I feel as if I have been singled out for special attention. 
The who of that issue is subject to a bit of detective work but I know who has questioned me in the past. 
If I wasn’t doing my job, that would be one thing but I am doing it and I do it well. 
If you have any insight or words of encouragement.. send them on. 

Be well. 
___________________________________ 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 

 
  
 
 
 
From: femamax@gmail.com <femamax@gmail.com>  
Sent: Thursday, February 27, 2020 12:07 PM 
To: 'Alexander, Dennis' <dennis.alexander@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: DEFICIENCY 

I understand your position Dennis but I do have a different perspective of my performance. 
To condemn me to purgatory over 2 emails out of several thousand that I have sent reeks of pettiness at a minimum. 
You know what is going on here so we’ll let sleeping dogs lie. 
My performance has been effective as indicated below but everyone can tell a story the way they wish. 
Appreciate your kind and professional feedback. 

Staff 
Name 

RTM 
Completed 
Tasks 

Staff Name 

REVIEW AND 
COMPLETE EEI 

Staff Name 

PDMG 
COMPLETE 
DDD 

Staff Name 

COMPLETE 
PROJECT 
SCOPE 
AND COST 
ROUTING 

Staff Name 

PDMG REVIEW 
DDD/SCOPE/COST 

Staff Name 

PDMG 
REVIEW 
SCOPE/COST 

Staff Name 

COMPLETE 
INITIAL 
PROJECT 
DEVELOPMENT 

Denson, 
Melva E. 

MEINDL, 
MAX 

Teston, 
Sheree R. 

Cassidy, 
Richard 

Legere, 
Shane C. 

Miller, 
summer 
M. 

White, 
Richard A. 

JOHNSON, 
BRENDA 
R. 

Phillips, 
Natalie M. 

9 

9 

9 

8 

8 

8 

7 

6 

6 

CLEBOURN-
MCPHERSO, 
TOYA V. 

Phillips, 
Natalie M. 

Davis, 
Henry E. 

MEINDL, 
MAX 

SHERMAN, 
ZERA R. 

Denson, 
Melva E. 

Simonson, 
Nikolas 

Afolayan, 
Akinlabi A. 

LaPoten, 
Halden 

460 

394 

340 

260 

228 

226 

210 

172 

170 

Phillips, 
Natalie M. 

Denson, 
Melva E. 

SHERMAN, 
ZERA R. 

Afolayan, 
Akinlabi A. 

FOSTER, 
SHONDALON 
G. 

CLEBOURN-
MCPHERSO, 
TOYA V. 

Simonson, 
Nikolas 

MEINDL, 
MAX 

Bassett, 
Jerone 

621 

464 

384 

361 

354 

347 

238 

202 

185 

SHERMAN, 
ZERA R. 

MEINDL, 
MAX 

Phillips, 
Natalie M. 

Bassett, 
Jerone 

Denson, 
Melva E. 

Simonson, 
Nikolas 

FOSTER, 
SHONDALON 
G. 

Cassidy, 
Richard 

Marchetto, 
Jeffrey 

182 

162 

162 

123 

106 

101 

84 

80 

79 

MEINDL, 
MAX 

CLEBOURN-
MCPHERSO, 
TOYA V. 

Phillips, 
Natalie M. 

Davis, 
Henry E. 

Cassidy, 
Richard 

Burris, 
Terry L. 

LaPoten, 
Halden 

Denson, 
Melva E. 

RABSATT 
JR, ECEDRO 

158 

147 

135 

131 

96 

83 

81 

77 

76 

Legere, 
Shane C. 

Marchetto, 
Jeffrey 

Phillips, 
Natalie M. 

ALJABBARY, 
MWAFAQ 

Simonson, 
Nikolas 

MEINDL, 
MAX 

SHERMAN, 
ZERA R. 

Vulgamore, 
Joe R. 

Denson, 
Melva E. 

122 

102 

95 

75 

73 

70 

69 

63 

55 

MEINDL, 
MAX 

CLEBOURN-
MCPHERSO, 
TOYA V. 

Phillips, 
Natalie M. 

Davis, 
Henry E. 

SHERMAN, 
ZERA R. 

Bassett, 
Jerone 

JOHNSON, 
BRENDA R. 

Afolayan, 
Akinlabi A. 

Simonson, 
Nikolas 

501 

408 

404 

356 

288 

264 

253 

235 

220 

Staff Name 

MEINDL, 
MAX 

Phillips, 
Natalie M. 

Burris, 
Terry L. 

RABSATT 
JR, ECEDRO 

SHERMAN, 
ZERA R. 

CLEBOURN-
MCPHERSO, 
TOYA V. 

Simonson, 
Nikolas 

Cassidy, 
Richard 

ALJABBARY, 
MWAFAQ 

REVIEW 
CREATED 
RFI 
(PDMG) 

Staff Name 

VERIFY 
RFI 
(PDMG) 

Staff Name 

COMPLETE 
WORK 
ORDER 

55 

26 

20 

17 

16 

15 

15 

14 

13 

MEINDL, 
MAX 

Phillips, 
Natalie M. 

RABSATT JR, 
ECEDRO 

Simonson, 
Nikolas 

LaPoten, 
Halden 

Cassidy, 
Richard 

d'Amecourt, 
John C. 

Patten, 
Russell E. 

Sanders, 
Marlys 

63 

15 

14 

14 

13 

12 

11 

11 

10 

CLEBOURN-
MCPHERSO, 
TOYA V. 

Phillips, 
Natalie M. 

SHERMAN, 
ZERA R. 

Bassett, 
Jerone 

Stevens, 
Mark D. 

MEINDL, 
MAX 

Simonson, 
Nikolas 

Marchetto, 
Jeffrey 

Vulgamore, 
Joe R. 

118 

102 

58 

42 

41 

30 

29 

28 

28 

 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, June 26, 2019 2:22 PM
femamax@gmail.com
FMLA
Electronic Code of Federal Regulations-PART 825—THE FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE 
ACT OF 1993.pdf

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

1

 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, June 26, 2019 2:06 PM
Alexander, Dennis
RE: WebTA

FYI: 
From: Gause, Jacqueline  
Sent: Tuesday, May 21, 2019 10:04 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable accommodation  

Good morning Max,  

I believe a little while back you requested to work reduced hours due to medical restrictions. I have reached out to ERO to 
get more guidance on what employees can do in situations where a supervisor/leadership initially denies an alternative 
work schedule that was due to medical reason. If you still need or wish to pursue an alternate work schedule through the 
reasonable accommodation route you can reach out to ERO for more guidance.  

Charise Scott - 202-856-2114 
Tam Nguyen - 609-508-2673 

Regards,  

Jacqueline Gause, MSc 
Human Resources 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Department of Homeland Security 
Hurricane Harvey-DR4332-TX 
Texas Recovery Office  
Houston, TX 
Mobile: 202-322-6241 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 

2

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Alexander, Dennis  
Sent: Wednesday, June 26, 2019 1:53 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: WebTA 

FYI, maybe you know this, but FMLA is for a long term out of office, not for a few hours here or there. 

Thanks, 
Dennis 

Dennis J. Alexander, P.E. 
Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
Disaster DR4332 TX-- Harvey 
TRO TX Harris County Branch II 
8332 Willow Place Drive South 
Houston, TX 77070 
281-897-2017 Desk Phone 
737-230-8182 Cell Phone 
Dennis.alexander@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, June 26, 2019 1:47 PM 
To: Alexander, Dennis <dennis.alexander@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: WebTA 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

3

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Gause, Jacqueline  
Sent: Wednesday, May 29, 2019 9:56 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>; Atchison, Randy <Randy.Atchison@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: WebTA 

Good morning,  

FMLA does not carry any leave. FMLA allows an employee to take up to 480 hours of unpaid for a personal or family 
medical situation.  

Excerpt from OPM: 
Under the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (FMLA), most Federal employees are entitled to a total of up to 12 
workweeks of unpaid leave during any 12-month period. 

An employee may elect to substitute annual leave and/or sick leave, consistent with current laws and OPM's 
regulations for using annual and sick leave, for any unpaid leave under the FMLA.  

The employee can request FMLA LWOP, but will not receive any compensation. If the employee wishes to be paid while 
out on leave they will need to use their annual or sick leave with the FMLA code.  

If you have additional questions or need me to go into further detail please let me know.  

Regards,  

Jacqueline Gause, MSc 
Human Resources 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Department of Homeland Security 
Hurricane Harvey-DR4332-TX 
Texas Recovery Office  
Houston, TX 
Mobile: 202-322-6241 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Friday, May 24, 2019 9:39 AM 
To: Atchison, Randy <Randy.Atchison@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov>; Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: WebTA 

4

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Randy, 
My understanding is that with approved MFLA I am not required to use up my sick days or annual leave. 
I requested MFLA leave without pay which I have been doing for several weeks now. 
Please advise soonest. 

“Cannot take TWOP until all your leave has been used. Also please put the hours in the day block of the calendar. Thank You Randy Atchison” 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

5

 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, June 26, 2019 2:01 PM
Alexander, Dennis
RE: WebTA

6

  
§825.202   Intermittent leave or reduced leave schedule. 

(a) Definition. FMLA leave may be taken intermittently or on a reduced leave schedule under certain circumstances. 
Intermittent leave is FMLA leave taken in separate blocks of time due to a single qualifying reason. A reduced leave 
schedule is a leave schedule that reduces an employee's usual number of working hours per workweek, or hours per 
workday. A reduced leave schedule is a change in the employee's schedule for a period of time, normally from full-time 
to part-time. 

(b) Medical necessity. For intermittent leave or leave on a reduced leave schedule taken because of one's own serious 
health condition, to care for a spouse, parent, son, or daughter with a serious health condition, or to care for a covered 
servicemember with a serious injury or illness, there must be a medical need for leave and it must be that such medical 
need can be best accommodated through an intermittent or reduced leave schedule. The treatment regimen and other 
information described in the certification of a serious health condition and in the certification of a serious injury or 
illness, if required by the employer, addresses the medical necessity of intermittent leave or leave on a reduced leave 
schedule. See §§825.306, 825.310. Leave may be taken intermittently or on a reduced leave schedule when medically 
necessary for planned and/or unanticipated medical treatment of a serious health condition or of a covered 
servicemember's serious injury or illness, or for recovery from treatment or recovery from a serious health condition or 
a covered servicemember's serious injury or illness. It may also be taken to provide care or psychological comfort to a 
covered family member with a serious health condition or a covered servicemember with a serious injury or illness. 

(1) Intermittent leave may be taken for a serious health condition of a spouse, parent, son, or daughter, for the 
employee's own serious health condition, or a serious injury or illness of a covered servicemember which requires 
treatment by a health care provider periodically, rather than for one continuous period of time, and may include leave 
of periods from an hour or more to several weeks. Examples of intermittent leave would include leave taken on an 
occasional basis for medical appointments, or leave taken several days at a time spread over a period of six months, 
such as for chemotherapy. A pregnant employee may take leave intermittently for prenatal examinations or for her own 
condition, such as for periods of severe morning sickness. An example of an employee taking leave on a reduced leave 

7

 
 
schedule is an employee who is recovering from a serious health condition and is not strong enough to work a full-time 
schedule. 

(2) Intermittent or reduced schedule leave may be taken for absences where the employee or family member is 
incapacitated or unable to perform the essential functions of the position because of a chronic serious health condition 
or a serious injury or illness of a covered servicemember, even if he or she does not receive treatment by a health care 
provider. See §§825.113 and 825.127. 

(c) Birth or placement. When leave is taken after the birth of a healthy child or placement of a healthy child for adoption 
or foster care, an employee may take leave intermittently or on a reduced leave schedule only if the employer agrees. 
Such a schedule reduction might occur, for example, where an employee, with the employer's agreement, works part-
time after the birth of a child, or takes leave in several segments. The employer's agreement is not required, however, 
for leave during which the expectant mother has a serious health condition in connection with the birth of her child or if 
the newborn child has a serious health condition. See §825.204 for rules governing transfer to an alternative position 
that better accommodates intermittent leave. See also §825.120 (pregnancy) and §825.121 (adoption and foster care). 

(d) Qualifying exigency. Leave due to a qualifying exigency may be taken on an intermittent or reduced leave schedule 
basis. 

[78 FR 8902, Feb. 6, 2013, as amended at 80 FR 10001, Feb. 25, 2015] 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Alexander, Dennis  
Sent: Wednesday, June 26, 2019 1:53 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: WebTA 

FYI, maybe you know this, but FMLA is for a long term out of office, not for a few hours here or there. 

Thanks, 
Dennis 

8

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dennis J. Alexander, P.E. 
Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
Disaster DR4332 TX-- Harvey 
TRO TX Harris County Branch II 
8332 Willow Place Drive South 
Houston, TX 77070 
281-897-2017 Desk Phone 
737-230-8182 Cell Phone 
Dennis.alexander@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, June 26, 2019 1:47 PM 
To: Alexander, Dennis <dennis.alexander@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: WebTA 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Gause, Jacqueline  
Sent: Wednesday, May 29, 2019 9:56 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>; Atchison, Randy <Randy.Atchison@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: WebTA 

Good morning,  

FMLA does not carry any leave. FMLA allows an employee to take up to 480 hours of unpaid for a personal or family 
medical situation.  

9

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Excerpt from OPM: 
Under the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (FMLA), most Federal employees are entitled to a total of up to 12 
workweeks of unpaid leave during any 12-month period. 

An employee may elect to substitute annual leave and/or sick leave, consistent with current laws and OPM's 
regulations for using annual and sick leave, for any unpaid leave under the FMLA.  

The employee can request FMLA LWOP, but will not receive any compensation. If the employee wishes to be paid while 
out on leave they will need to use their annual or sick leave with the FMLA code.  

If you have additional questions or need me to go into further detail please let me know.  

Regards,  

Jacqueline Gause, MSc 
Human Resources 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Department of Homeland Security 
Hurricane Harvey-DR4332-TX 
Texas Recovery Office  
Houston, TX 
Mobile: 202-322-6241 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Friday, May 24, 2019 9:39 AM 
To: Atchison, Randy <Randy.Atchison@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov>; Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: WebTA 

Randy, 
My understanding is that with approved MFLA I am not required to use up my sick days or annual leave. 
I requested MFLA leave without pay which I have been doing for several weeks now. 
Please advise soonest. 

“Cannot take TWOP until all your leave has been used. Also please put the hours in the day block of the calendar. Thank You Randy Atchison” 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 

10

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

11

 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, June 26, 2019 1:53 PM
Alexander, Dennis
RE: WebTA

It allows for reduced hours. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Alexander, Dennis  
Sent: Wednesday, June 26, 2019 1:53 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: WebTA 

FYI, maybe you know this, but FMLA is for a long term out of office, not for a few hours here or there. 

Thanks, 
Dennis 

Dennis J. Alexander, P.E. 
Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
Disaster DR4332 TX-- Harvey 
TRO TX Harris County Branch II 
8332 Willow Place Drive South 
Houston, TX 77070 
281-897-2017 Desk Phone 
737-230-8182 Cell Phone 
Dennis.alexander@fema.dhs.gov 

12

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, June 26, 2019 1:47 PM 
To: Alexander, Dennis <dennis.alexander@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: WebTA 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Gause, Jacqueline  
Sent: Wednesday, May 29, 2019 9:56 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>; Atchison, Randy <Randy.Atchison@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: WebTA 

Good morning,  

FMLA does not carry any leave. FMLA allows an employee to take up to 480 hours of unpaid for a personal or family 
medical situation.  

Excerpt from OPM: 
Under the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (FMLA), most Federal employees are entitled to a total of up to 12 
workweeks of unpaid leave during any 12-month period. 

An employee may elect to substitute annual leave and/or sick leave, consistent with current laws and OPM's 
regulations for using annual and sick leave, for any unpaid leave under the FMLA.  

The employee can request FMLA LWOP, but will not receive any compensation. If the employee wishes to be paid while 
out on leave they will need to use their annual or sick leave with the FMLA code.  

If you have additional questions or need me to go into further detail please let me know.  

13

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regards,  

Jacqueline Gause, MSc 
Human Resources 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Department of Homeland Security 
Hurricane Harvey-DR4332-TX 
Texas Recovery Office  
Houston, TX 
Mobile: 202-322-6241 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Friday, May 24, 2019 9:39 AM 
To: Atchison, Randy <Randy.Atchison@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov>; Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: WebTA 

Randy, 
My understanding is that with approved MFLA I am not required to use up my sick days or annual leave. 
I requested MFLA leave without pay which I have been doing for several weeks now. 
Please advise soonest. 

“Cannot take TWOP until all your leave has been used. Also please put the hours in the day block of the calendar. Thank You Randy Atchison” 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

14

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Alexander, Dennis
Wednesday, June 26, 2019 1:53 PM
Meindl, Max
RE: WebTA

FYI, maybe you know this, but FMLA is for a long term out of office, not for a few hours here or there. 

Thanks, 
Dennis 

Dennis J. Alexander, P.E. 
Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
Disaster DR4332 TX-- Harvey 
TRO TX Harris County Branch II 
8332 Willow Place Drive South 
Houston, TX 77070 
281-897-2017 Desk Phone 
737-230-8182 Cell Phone 
Dennis.alexander@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, June 26, 2019 1:47 PM 
To: Alexander, Dennis <dennis.alexander@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: WebTA 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

15

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Gause, Jacqueline  
Sent: Wednesday, May 29, 2019 9:56 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>; Atchison, Randy <Randy.Atchison@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: WebTA 

Good morning,  

FMLA does not carry any leave. FMLA allows an employee to take up to 480 hours of unpaid for a personal or family 
medical situation.  

Excerpt from OPM: 
Under the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (FMLA), most Federal employees are entitled to a total of up to 12 
workweeks of unpaid leave during any 12-month period. 

An employee may elect to substitute annual leave and/or sick leave, consistent with current laws and OPM's 
regulations for using annual and sick leave, for any unpaid leave under the FMLA.  

The employee can request FMLA LWOP, but will not receive any compensation. If the employee wishes to be paid while 
out on leave they will need to use their annual or sick leave with the FMLA code.  

If you have additional questions or need me to go into further detail please let me know.  

Regards,  

Jacqueline Gause, MSc 
Human Resources 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Department of Homeland Security 
Hurricane Harvey-DR4332-TX 
Texas Recovery Office  
Houston, TX 
Mobile: 202-322-6241 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Friday, May 24, 2019 9:39 AM 
To: Atchison, Randy <Randy.Atchison@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov>; Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: WebTA 

16

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Randy, 
My understanding is that with approved MFLA I am not required to use up my sick days or annual leave. 
I requested MFLA leave without pay which I have been doing for several weeks now. 
Please advise soonest. 

“Cannot take TWOP until all your leave has been used. Also please put the hours in the day block of the calendar. Thank You Randy Atchison” 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

17

 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, June 26, 2019 1:51 PM
Alexander, Dennis
FW: WebTa

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Agaiby, Angela  
Sent: Tuesday, May 14, 2019 9:33 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: WebTa 

Good morning,  

Please submit your oLWOP/FMLA request in in WebTA under leave a premium pay for 05/09/19 and 05/10/19.  Once 
your supervisor has approved the request please go into the system and re-affirm your time. Then I can validate.  

Please let me know if you have any questions.  

Thank you 

Angela Agaiby 
PA Operations Support Specialist 
DR-4332 
8223 Willow Place Dr. S 
Houston, TX 77070 
512-574-7612 
Angela.Agaiby@FEMA.DHS.GOV 

18

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19

 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, June 26, 2019 1:47 PM
Alexander, Dennis
FW: WebTA

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Gause, Jacqueline  
Sent: Wednesday, May 29, 2019 9:56 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>; Atchison, Randy <Randy.Atchison@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: WebTA 

Good morning,  

FMLA does not carry any leave. FMLA allows an employee to take up to 480 hours of unpaid for a personal or family 
medical situation.  

Excerpt from OPM: 
Under the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (FMLA), most Federal employees are entitled to a total of up to 12 
workweeks of unpaid leave during any 12-month period. 

An employee may elect to substitute annual leave and/or sick leave, consistent with current laws and OPM's 
regulations for using annual and sick leave, for any unpaid leave under the FMLA.  

The employee can request FMLA LWOP, but will not receive any compensation. If the employee wishes to be paid while 
out on leave they will need to use their annual or sick leave with the FMLA code.  

If you have additional questions or need me to go into further detail please let me know.  

Regards,  

20

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jacqueline Gause, MSc 
Human Resources 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Department of Homeland Security 
Hurricane Harvey-DR4332-TX 
Texas Recovery Office  
Houston, TX 
Mobile: 202-322-6241 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Friday, May 24, 2019 9:39 AM 
To: Atchison, Randy <Randy.Atchison@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov>; Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: WebTA 

Randy, 
My understanding is that with approved MFLA I am not required to use up my sick days or annual leave. 
I requested MFLA leave without pay which I have been doing for several weeks now. 
Please advise soonest. 

“Cannot take TWOP until all your leave has been used. Also please put the hours in the day block of the calendar. Thank You Randy Atchison” 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

21

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, June 26, 2019 1:44 PM
Alexander, Dennis
FW: Timesheet FMLA

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Gause, Jacqueline  
Sent: Tuesday, April 23, 2019 3:10 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Obasa, Babajide <babajide.obasa@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Timesheet FMLA 

Good afternoon,  

I will need you to provide me with your paystub showing your hours worked. You can obtain this information from my 
epp. I need you to submit paystub from when you converted to CORE, PP25 (2018), and PP 7 (2019).  

Please let me know if you have any other questions.  

Regards,  

Jacqueline Gause, MSc 
Human Resources 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Department of Homeland Security 
Hurricane Harvey-DR4332-TX 
Texas Recovery Office  
Houston, TX 
Mobile: 202-322-6241 

22

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, April 23, 2019 1:30 PM 
To: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Obasa, Babajide <babajide.obasa@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Timesheet FMLA 

Reservist since 08/2017. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Gause, Jacqueline  
Sent: Monday, April 22, 2019 4:21 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Obasa, Babajide <babajide.obasa@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Timesheet FMLA 

Good afternoon Max,  

Prior to becoming a CORE for the TRO were you employed with FEMA? Currently, you have been with the TRO since 
June 2018 thus, you do not meet the 1 yr requirement for FMLA. If you have prior time with FEMA as a CORE, reservist, 
or local hire please let me know so that I can verify the time. 

Regards,  

Jacqueline Gause, MSc 
Human Resources 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Department of Homeland Security 
Hurricane Harvey-DR4332-TX 
Texas Recovery Office  
Houston, TX 
Mobile: 202-322-6241 

23

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Monday, April 22, 2019 10:39 AM 
To: Guelzow, Nicole <nicole.guelzow@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Obasa, Babajide <babajide.obasa@fema.dhs.gov>; David, 
Patricia <Patricia.David@fema.dhs.gov>; Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Timesheet FMLA 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Guelzow, Nicole  
Sent: Tuesday, April 2, 2019 4:51 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Obasa, Babajide <babajide.obasa@fema.dhs.gov>; David, 
Patricia <Patricia.David@fema.dhs.gov>; Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Timesheet FMLA 
Importance: High 

Good afternoon Max, 

I am performing timekeeping duties while your regular timekeeper is out of the office.  In reviewing your timesheet, I 
see that you are claiming LWOP – FMLA.   

Have you been approved for FMLA?   

If you have, I apologize as the paperwork was not provided to the Austin office.  If not, the leave category should be 
changed to LWOP until you receive approval. 

Please let us know the status of your FMLA application as soon as possible so that we can move forward with your 
timesheet certification. 

Respectfully, 

Nicole Guelzow, MPA 
Administrative Specialist (HR) 
Texas Recovery Office 

24

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11000 N Interstate 35 
Austin, TX 78753 
(202) 718-1306 cell  

25

 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, June 26, 2019 1:41 PM
Alexander, Dennis
FW: FMLA

Importance:

High

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Obasa, Babajide  
Sent: Tuesday, April 23, 2019 10:05 AM 
To: Silva, Patricia <patricia.silva@fema.dhs.gov>; Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: FMLA 
Importance: High 

Hello and Happy Tuesday! 

Yes Patricia…Jackie will follow up with Mr. Meindl as to the appropriate next steps. 

Thank you so much😊 

J- 

From: Silva, Patricia  
Sent: Tuesday, April 23, 2019 6:36 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Obasa, Babajide <babajide.obasa@fema.dhs.gov>; Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: FMLA 

Good morning Mr. Meindl, 

26

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I have reviewed your paperwork and all seems in order. I have copied Jide Obasa and Jacqueline Gause in this email as 
they are now the leads for FMLA in the TRO. Please consult with them on next steps. 

Jide/Jackie- could you please inform Mr. Meindl of next steps. 

Thank you, 

Patricia Silva 
Employee/Labor Relations Specialist 
Office of the Chief Component Human Capital Officer (OCCHCO)| FEMA|DHS 
500 C. Street SW/Washington, DC, 7th Floor  
Email: patricia.silva@fema.dhs.gov 
Office: 202. 212. 5238 
Mobile: 202.368.7217 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Monday, April 22, 2019 11:40 AM 
To: Silva, Patricia <patricia.silva@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: FMLA 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Silva, Patricia  
Sent: Wednesday, March 13, 2019 5:57 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: FMLA 

Good morning Mr. Meindl, 

You need to communicate to your supervisor of record the need take FMLA leave at least 30 calendar days before the 
start of the planned absence. I have attached the Absence and Leave Manual for your review. Chapter 5 addresses 
FMLA.  

27

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I have also received the medical certification in connection with your request for FMLA leave.; however, the following 
required information is missing from the medical certification or is vague and needs clarification:  

1. 

It is not clear whether you need FMLA leave intermittently or for a continuous period of time or both.  

a. 

b. 

If your FMLA leave is for a continuous period of time, your doctor needs to state so. In the medical 
documentation you provided it only states “a few days after heart surgery”.  In addition, the your doctor 
will need to include the date of your surgery. 
If your request is for intermittent leave for a planned medical treatment, the dates (actual or estimates) 
on which such treatment is expected to be given, the duration of such treatment, and the period of 
recovery, if any, before you would be able to return to work; 

2.  Your medical provider stated that your condition will cause episodic flare ups; however, the certification is 

missing the frequency of the flare ups. The medical certification needs to include an estimate of the frequency 
of the flare ups and the duration of related incapacity that you may have over the next 6 months (Part B, 
question #7). 

Please be advised that the complete medical documentation is due 15 calendar days from this email.  

Let me know if you have any questions. 

Thank you, 

Patricia Silva 
Employee/Labor Relations Specialist 
Office of the Chief Component Human Capital Officer (OCCHCO)| FEMA|DHS 
500 C. Street SW/Washington, DC, 7th Floor  
Email: patricia.silva@fema.dhs.gov 
Office: 202. 212. 5238 
Mobile: 202.368.7217 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, March 12, 2019 3:13 PM 
To: Silva, Patricia <patricia.silva@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: femamax@gmail.com; rick@guerradays.com 
Subject: RE: FMLA 

Jamie McAllister 
Deputy Infrastructure Branch Director  
DR 4332 TX JFO Austin 
Region 6 Infrastructure Branch 
DHS/FEMA 
(202) 709-0851 Cell 
jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov 

No, Jamie is  not aware of the request that I am aware of. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 

28

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Silva, Patricia  
Sent: Tuesday, March 12, 2019 2:02 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: FMLA 

Mr. Meindl, 

Who is your supervisor of record? Are they aware of your FMLA request? 

Patricia Silva 
Employee/Labor Relations Specialist 
Office of the Chief Component Human Capital Officer (OCCHCO)| FEMA|DHS 
500 C. Street SW/Washington, DC, 7th Floor  
Email: patricia.silva@fema.dhs.gov 
Office: 202. 212. 5238 
Mobile: 202.368.7217 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, March 6, 2019 2:29 PM 
To: Silva, Patricia <patricia.silva@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: femamax@gmail.com 
Subject: RE: FMLA 

Document attached. 
Please advise as to the procedure subsequent the submission of this document to you. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

29

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From: Silva, Patricia  
Sent: Wednesday, March 6, 2019 1:03 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: FMLA 

Yes, that is correct.  

Patricia Silva 
Employee/Labor Relations Specialist 
Office of the Chief Component Human Capital Officer (OCCHCO)| FEMA|DHS 
500 C. Street SW/Washington, DC, 7th Floor  
Email: patricia.silva@fema.dhs.gov 
Office: 202. 212. 5238 
Mobile: 202.368.7217 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, March 6, 2019 11:56 AM 
To: Silva, Patricia <patricia.silva@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FMLA 

I have been advised that you’re the individual I’m supposed to send my FMLA forms to. 
Is that correct? 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

30

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:

Subject:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, October 23, 2019 1:37 PM
Gause, Jacqueline; David, Patricia
Wick, Timothy; Terry, Detra; Alexander, Dennis; brent@guerradays.com; FEMA-
EqualRights
RE: FMLA Recertification - M. Meindl

Thanks JG, no problem, I’m working on an update with my providers, to appropriately capture/document/list all of the 
existing/new/challenging/interesting, issues that have manifested since the surgery. Appreciate your assistance.. 

___________________________________ 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.   
It may contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).   
The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to 
be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov>  
Sent: Wednesday, October 23, 2019 1:09 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>; David, Patricia <Patricia.David@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Wick, Timothy <Timothy.Wick@fema.dhs.gov>; Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov>; Alexander, Dennis 
<dennis.alexander@fema.dhs.gov>; brent@guerradays.com; FEMA-EqualRights <FEMA-EqualRights@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: FMLA Recertification - M. Meindl 

Good afternoon,  

The FMLA update process being applied in this situation is consistent with policy. Your approved FMLA condition of 
record is the matter being addressed as it relates to the updates being requested. You have said in your response that 
you are not scheduled to see the physician until next year and that you will request an appointment and attempt to get 
one as soon as possible. I will follow up with you in seven (7) days to see if you were able to get an appointment for this 
matter.  

In the meantime I will recommend to your supervisor to continue to approve your current FMLA request for the said 
condition until you have an appointment scheduled. The specifics of the concerns is that your current FMLA is approved 
for 1-3 occurrences every month and you have exceeded the frequency so your management is attempting to obtain 
updated information.  

Thanks for your cooperation with this matter. Please let me know if you have additional questions or concerns.  

1

 
   
 
 
 
 
 
Regards,  

Jacqueline Gause, MSc 
Human Resources 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Department of Homeland Security 
Hurricane Harvey-DR4332-TX 
Texas Recovery Office  
Houston, TX 
Mobile: 202-322-6241 

From: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>  
Sent: Tuesday, October 22, 2019 4:22 PM 
To: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov>; David, Patricia <Patricia.David@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Wick, Timothy <Timothy.Wick@fema.dhs.gov>; Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov>; Alexander, Dennis 
<dennis.alexander@fema.dhs.gov>; brent@guerradays.com; FEMA-EqualRights <FEMA-EqualRights@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: FMLA Recertification - M. Meindl 

JG, 
My next appointment with the VA is 10/29/2019 with the ENT (ear, nose, throat) group at the DeBakey VA hospital to 
attempt to ascertain the source for my recurring dizzy spells. 
My next appointment with my primary care physician is next Feb, 2020. 
My next appointment with my pulmonary care specialist for my COPD (Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease) is also 
next year. 
I will do an online request to see my primary at the Katy VA outpatient clinic, but I’m not sure if that can happen within 15 
days, it is the VA, so nothing is for certain. 
I will also attempt to get an appointment with my primary care private physician in Bellville. 
I must admit that as an senior citizen and as an individual who has identified, in the onboarding process, as an individual 
with a disability and when factoring in the very problematic heart surgery and subsequent associated health issues, I am 
concerned about the way the institution and/or individuals within the institution, treat those identified as disabled, more 
specifically, myself.   
If my work was lacking, maybe I could understand, but it isn’t and I don’t understand.   
It does seem that personalities have drifted in to the equation, in my opinion. 
I appreciate your assistance and efforts with my disability and during my recovery but, I must admit that it has been an 
extremely distasteful experience with other FEMA personnel. 

I will endeavor to get the paperwork returned in a timely manner but I am concerned about the 15 day window. 

Please advise. 

___________________________________ 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

2

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.   
It may contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).   
The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to 
be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov>  
Sent: Tuesday, October 22, 2019 3:13 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Wick, Timothy <Timothy.Wick@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FMLA Recertification - M. Meindl 

Good afternoon Max,  

On May 1, 2019 you were initially approved for FMLA due to a serious/chronic health condition.  Given that it has now 
been more than thirty (30) calendar days since your last medical update for your current FMLA condition, I am requesting 
that you provide me with an FMLA recertification as it relates to your current FMLA condition of record.  The 
recertification is now necessary to ensure that the workload on your team can be planned and managed effectively while 
assisting you during your time of recovery.  Therefore, I am requesting that you work with your physician to respond to 
all questions where appropriate especially those related to the questions identified below. These questions are not separate 
and apart from the recertification form but can be responded to within the context of the questions already provided on the 
form.  (29 CFR 825.308(a), permits recertification every 30 days for chronic or permanent/long-term conditions.)   

Purpose of this FMLA Recertification Update: 

  1. To validate if you are continuing to see the physician for the specific condition listed on your FMLA application dated 
and signed by your physician, on 4/11/2019.       

  2.  Request that you provide an estimate of the duration of your condition & if you will be incapacitated for a single 
continuous period of time.  (See questions #1 & #4). 

  3.  Request that you specify what dates, if any, you will have planned appointments within the next 30 days. (See 
Question #5) 

  4.  Request that your physician state whether or not you require care on an intermittent or reduced schedule basis, 
including any time for recovery.  (See Question #6) 

  5.  Request that your physician provide an estimate of when you will have flare-ups during your recovery period (if 
known) that will prevent you from performing your job functions. (See question #7). 

Your health remains of paramount concern to me as well as our mission.  My goal remains to work cooperatively with 
you and your physician in a manner which affords you the best opportunity to recover and return to full time employment 
status.  However, failure to provide this requested FMLA Recertification information within fifteen (15) working days of 
receipt will result in the denial of any FMLA related leave until the information is provided.  

If you experience difficulty providing this information within the specified period, please see me, or in my absence 
Patricia David, and provide a brief written statement documenting your hardship and your request for extension will be 
responded to within three (3) working days. 

3

   
 
 
Regards, 

Jacqueline Gause, MSc 
Human Resources 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Department of Homeland Security 
Hurricane Harvey-DR4332-TX 
Texas Recovery Office  
Houston, TX 
Mobile: 202-322-6241 

4

 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:

Subject:

Good afternoon,  

Gause, Jacqueline
Wednesday, October 23, 2019 1:09 PM
Meindl, Max; David, Patricia
Wick, Timothy; Terry, Detra; Alexander, Dennis; brent@guerradays.com; FEMA-
EqualRights
RE: FMLA Recertification - M. Meindl

The FMLA update process being applied in this situation is consistent with policy. Your approved FMLA condition of 
record is the matter being addressed as it relates to the updates being requested. You have said in your response that 
you are not scheduled to see the physician until next year and that you will request an appointment and attempt to get 
one as soon as possible. I will follow up with you in seven (7) days to see if you were able to get an appointment for this 
matter.  

In the meantime I will recommend to your supervisor to continue to approve your current FMLA request for the said 
condition until you have an appointment scheduled. The specifics of the concerns is that your current FMLA is approved 
for 1-3 occurrences every month and you have exceeded the frequency so your management is attempting to obtain 
updated information.  

Thanks for your cooperation with this matter. Please let me know if you have additional questions or concerns.  

Regards,  

Jacqueline Gause, MSc 
Human Resources 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Department of Homeland Security 
Hurricane Harvey-DR4332-TX 
Texas Recovery Office  
Houston, TX 
Mobile: 202-322-6241 

From: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>  
Sent: Tuesday, October 22, 2019 4:22 PM 
To: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov>; David, Patricia <Patricia.David@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Wick, Timothy <Timothy.Wick@fema.dhs.gov>; Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov>; Alexander, Dennis 
<dennis.alexander@fema.dhs.gov>; brent@guerradays.com; FEMA-EqualRights <FEMA-EqualRights@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: FMLA Recertification - M. Meindl 

JG, 
My next appointment with the VA is 10/29/2019 with the ENT (ear, nose, throat) group at the DeBakey VA hospital to 
attempt to ascertain the source for my recurring dizzy spells. 
My next appointment with my primary care physician is next Feb, 2020. 
My next appointment with my pulmonary care specialist for my COPD (Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease) is also 
next year. 

5

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I will do an online request to see my primary at the Katy VA outpatient clinic, but I’m not sure if that can happen within 15 
days, it is the VA, so nothing is for certain. 
I will also attempt to get an appointment with my primary care private physician in Bellville. 
I must admit that as an senior citizen and as an individual who has identified, in the onboarding process, as an individual 
with a disability and when factoring in the very problematic heart surgery and subsequent associated health issues, I am 
concerned about the way the institution and/or individuals within the institution, treat those identified as disabled, more 
specifically, myself.   
If my work was lacking, maybe I could understand, but it isn’t and I don’t understand.   
It does seem that personalities have drifted in to the equation, in my opinion. 
I appreciate your assistance and efforts with my disability and during my recovery but, I must admit that it has been an 
extremely distasteful experience with other FEMA personnel. 

I will endeavor to get the paperwork returned in a timely manner but I am concerned about the 15 day window. 

Please advise. 

___________________________________ 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.   
It may contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).   
The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to 
be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov>  
Sent: Tuesday, October 22, 2019 3:13 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Wick, Timothy <Timothy.Wick@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FMLA Recertification - M. Meindl 

Good afternoon Max,  

On May 1, 2019 you were initially approved for FMLA due to a serious/chronic health condition.  Given that it has now 
been more than thirty (30) calendar days since your last medical update for your current FMLA condition, I am requesting 
that you provide me with an FMLA recertification as it relates to your current FMLA condition of record.  The 
recertification is now necessary to ensure that the workload on your team can be planned and managed effectively while 
assisting you during your time of recovery.  Therefore, I am requesting that you work with your physician to respond to 
all questions where appropriate especially those related to the questions identified below. These questions are not separate 
and apart from the recertification form but can be responded to within the context of the questions already provided on the 
form.  (29 CFR 825.308(a), permits recertification every 30 days for chronic or permanent/long-term conditions.)   

Purpose of this FMLA Recertification Update: 

6

 
 
 
   
 
 
  1. To validate if you are continuing to see the physician for the specific condition listed on your FMLA application dated 
and signed by your physician, on 4/11/2019.       

  2.  Request that you provide an estimate of the duration of your condition & if you will be incapacitated for a single 
continuous period of time.  (See questions #1 & #4). 

  3.  Request that you specify what dates, if any, you will have planned appointments within the next 30 days. (See 
Question #5) 

  4.  Request that your physician state whether or not you require care on an intermittent or reduced schedule basis, 
including any time for recovery.  (See Question #6) 

  5.  Request that your physician provide an estimate of when you will have flare-ups during your recovery period (if 
known) that will prevent you from performing your job functions. (See question #7). 

Your health remains of paramount concern to me as well as our mission.  My goal remains to work cooperatively with 
you and your physician in a manner which affords you the best opportunity to recover and return to full time employment 
status.  However, failure to provide this requested FMLA Recertification information within fifteen (15) working days of 
receipt will result in the denial of any FMLA related leave until the information is provided.  

If you experience difficulty providing this information within the specified period, please see me, or in my absence 
Patricia David, and provide a brief written statement documenting your hardship and your request for extension will be 
responded to within three (3) working days. 

Regards, 

Jacqueline Gause, MSc 
Human Resources 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Department of Homeland Security 
Hurricane Harvey-DR4332-TX 
Texas Recovery Office  
Houston, TX 
Mobile: 202-322-6241 

7

 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Cooley, Sandra
Tuesday, October 22, 2019 5:09 PM
Meindl, Max
femamax@gmail.com
Re: FMLA Recertification - M. Meindl

Let me review your concerns and circle back Max.  Appreciate the opportunity to review. 

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Sent: Tuesday, October 22, 2019 4:47:59 PM 
To: Cooley, Sandra <Sandra.Cooley@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: femamax@gmail.com <femamax@gmail.com> 
Subject: FW: FMLA Recertification - M. Meindl  

Ms. Cooley, 
I am forwarding this email to you for information purposes. 
I have no problem doing the FMLA recertification, subject to the time issues and making appointments. 
What concerns me is that I feel as if I have been singled out for special attention. 
The who of that issue is subject to a bit of detective work but I know who has questioned me in the past. 
If I wasn’t doing my job, that would be one thing but I am doing it and I do it well. 
If you have any insight or words of encouragement.. send them on. 

Be well. 

___________________________________ 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.   
It may contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).   
The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to 
be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, October 22, 2019 4:22 PM 
To: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov>; David, Patricia <Patricia.David@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Wick, Timothy <Timothy.Wick@fema.dhs.gov>; TERRY, DETRA S. <DETRA.TERRY@FEMA.DHS.GOV>; Alexander, 
Dennis <dennis.alexander@fema.dhs.gov>; brent@guerradays.com; FEMA-EqualRights <FEMA-

8

 
  
  
  
   
  
EqualRights@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: FMLA Recertification - M. Meindl 

JG, 
My next appointment with the VA is 10/29/2019 with the ENT (ear, nose, throat) group at the DeBakey VA hospital to 
attempt to ascertain the source for my recurring dizzy spells. 
My next appointment with my primary care physician is next Feb, 2020. 
My next appointment with my pulmonary care specialist for my COPD (Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease) is also 
next year. 
I will do an online request to see my primary at the Katy VA outpatient clinic, but I’m not sure if that can happen within 15 
days, it is the VA, so nothing is for certain. 
I will also attempt to get an appointment with my primary care private physician in Bellville. 
I must admit that as an senior citizen and as an individual who has identified, in the onboarding process, as an individual 
with a disability and when factoring in the very problematic heart surgery and subsequent associated health issues, I am 
concerned about the way the institution and/or individuals within the institution, treat those identified as disabled, more 
specifically, myself.   
If my work was lacking, maybe I could understand, but it isn’t and I don’t understand.   
It does seem that personalities have drifted in to the equation, in my opinion. 
I appreciate your assistance and efforts with my disability and during my recovery but, I must admit that it has been an 
extremely distasteful experience with other FEMA personnel. 

I will endeavor to get the paperwork returned in a timely manner but I am concerned about the 15 day window. 

Please advise. 

___________________________________ 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.   
It may contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).   
The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to 
be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov>  
Sent: Tuesday, October 22, 2019 3:13 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Wick, Timothy <Timothy.Wick@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FMLA Recertification - M. Meindl 

Good afternoon Max,  
On May 1, 2019 you were initially approved for FMLA due to a serious/chronic health condition.  Given that it has now 
been more than thirty (30) calendar days since your last medical update for your current FMLA condition, I am requesting 
that you provide me with an FMLA recertification as it relates to your current FMLA condition of record.  The 

9

  
  
  
  
   
  
  
recertification is now necessary to ensure that the workload on your team can be planned and managed effectively while 
assisting you during your time of recovery.  Therefore, I am requesting that you work with your physician to respond to 
all questions where appropriate especially those related to the questions identified below. These questions are not separate 
and apart from the recertification form but can be responded to within the context of the questions already provided on the 
form.  (29 CFR 825.308(a), permits recertification every 30 days for chronic or permanent/long-term conditions.)   
Purpose of this FMLA Recertification Update: 
  1. To validate if you are continuing to see the physician for the specific condition listed on your FMLA application dated 
and signed by your physician, on 4/11/2019.       
  2.  Request that you provide an estimate of the duration of your condition & if you will be incapacitated for a single 
continuous period of time.  (See questions #1 & #4). 
  3.  Request that you specify what dates, if any, you will have planned appointments within the next 30 days. (See 
Question #5) 
  4.  Request that your physician state whether or not you require care on an intermittent or reduced schedule basis, 
including any time for recovery.  (See Question #6) 
  5.  Request that your physician provide an estimate of when you will have flare-ups during your recovery period (if 
known) that will prevent you from performing your job functions. (See question #7). 
Your health remains of paramount concern to me as well as our mission.  My goal remains to work cooperatively with 
you and your physician in a manner which affords you the best opportunity to recover and return to full time employment 
status.  However, failure to provide this requested FMLA Recertification information within fifteen (15) working days of 
receipt will result in the denial of any FMLA related leave until the information is provided.  
If you experience difficulty providing this information within the specified period, please see me, or in my absence 
Patricia David, and provide a brief written statement documenting your hardship and your request for extension will be 
responded to within three (3) working days. 
Regards, 

Jacqueline Gause, MSc 
Human Resources 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Department of Homeland Security 
Hurricane Harvey-DR4332-TX 
Texas Recovery Office  
Houston, TX 
Mobile: 202-322-6241 

10

  
  
  
  
  
  
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, October 22, 2019 4:48 PM
Cooley, Sandra
femamax@gmail.com
FW: FMLA Recertification - M. Meindl

Ms. Cooley, 
I am forwarding this email to you for information purposes. 
I have no problem doing the FMLA recertification, subject to the time issues and making appointments. 
What concerns me is that I feel as if I have been singled out for special attention. 
The who of that issue is subject to a bit of detective work but I know who has questioned me in the past. 
If I wasn’t doing my job, that would be one thing but I am doing it and I do it well. 
If you have any insight or words of encouragement.. send them on. 

Be well. 

___________________________________ 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.   
It may contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).   
The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to 
be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, October 22, 2019 4:22 PM 
To: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov>; David, Patricia <Patricia.David@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Wick, Timothy <Timothy.Wick@fema.dhs.gov>; TERRY, DETRA S. <DETRA.TERRY@FEMA.DHS.GOV>; Alexander, 
Dennis <dennis.alexander@fema.dhs.gov>; brent@guerradays.com; FEMA-EqualRights <FEMA-
EqualRights@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: FMLA Recertification - M. Meindl 

JG, 
My next appointment with the VA is 10/29/2019 with the ENT (ear, nose, throat) group at the DeBakey VA hospital to 
attempt to ascertain the source for my recurring dizzy spells. 
My next appointment with my primary care physician is next Feb, 2020. 
My next appointment with my pulmonary care specialist for my COPD (Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease) is also 
next year. 

11

 
 
   
 
 
I will do an online request to see my primary at the Katy VA outpatient clinic, but I’m not sure if that can happen within 15 
days, it is the VA, so nothing is for certain. 
I will also attempt to get an appointment with my primary care private physician in Bellville. 
I must admit that as an senior citizen and as an individual who has identified, in the onboarding process, as an individual 
with a disability and when factoring in the very problematic heart surgery and subsequent associated health issues, I am 
concerned about the way the institution and/or individuals within the institution, treat those identified as disabled, more 
specifically, myself.   
If my work was lacking, maybe I could understand, but it isn’t and I don’t understand.   
It does seem that personalities have drifted in to the equation, in my opinion. 
I appreciate your assistance and efforts with my disability and during my recovery but, I must admit that it has been an 
extremely distasteful experience with other FEMA personnel. 

I will endeavor to get the paperwork returned in a timely manner but I am concerned about the 15 day window. 

Please advise. 

___________________________________ 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.   
It may contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).   
The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to 
be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov>  
Sent: Tuesday, October 22, 2019 3:13 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Wick, Timothy <Timothy.Wick@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FMLA Recertification - M. Meindl 

Good afternoon Max,  

On May 1, 2019 you were initially approved for FMLA due to a serious/chronic health condition.  Given that it has now 
been more than thirty (30) calendar days since your last medical update for your current FMLA condition, I am requesting 
that you provide me with an FMLA recertification as it relates to your current FMLA condition of record.  The 
recertification is now necessary to ensure that the workload on your team can be planned and managed effectively while 
assisting you during your time of recovery.  Therefore, I am requesting that you work with your physician to respond to 
all questions where appropriate especially those related to the questions identified below. These questions are not separate 
and apart from the recertification form but can be responded to within the context of the questions already provided on the 
form.  (29 CFR 825.308(a), permits recertification every 30 days for chronic or permanent/long-term conditions.)   

Purpose of this FMLA Recertification Update: 

12

 
 
 
   
 
 
  1. To validate if you are continuing to see the physician for the specific condition listed on your FMLA application dated 
and signed by your physician, on 4/11/2019.       

  2.  Request that you provide an estimate of the duration of your condition & if you will be incapacitated for a single 
continuous period of time.  (See questions #1 & #4). 

  3.  Request that you specify what dates, if any, you will have planned appointments within the next 30 days. (See 
Question #5) 

  4.  Request that your physician state whether or not you require care on an intermittent or reduced schedule basis, 
including any time for recovery.  (See Question #6) 

  5.  Request that your physician provide an estimate of when you will have flare-ups during your recovery period (if 
known) that will prevent you from performing your job functions. (See question #7). 

Your health remains of paramount concern to me as well as our mission.  My goal remains to work cooperatively with 
you and your physician in a manner which affords you the best opportunity to recover and return to full time employment 
status.  However, failure to provide this requested FMLA Recertification information within fifteen (15) working days of 
receipt will result in the denial of any FMLA related leave until the information is provided.  

If you experience difficulty providing this information within the specified period, please see me, or in my absence 
Patricia David, and provide a brief written statement documenting your hardship and your request for extension will be 
responded to within three (3) working days. 

Regards, 

Jacqueline Gause, MSc 
Human Resources 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Department of Homeland Security 
Hurricane Harvey-DR4332-TX 
Texas Recovery Office  
Houston, TX 
Mobile: 202-322-6241 

13

 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:

Subject:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, October 22, 2019 4:22 PM
Gause, Jacqueline; David, Patricia
Wick, Timothy; TERRY, DETRA S.; Alexander, Dennis; brent@guerradays.com; FEMA-
EqualRights
RE: FMLA Recertification - M. Meindl

JG, 
My next appointment with the VA is 10/29/2019 with the ENT (ear, nose, throat) group at the DeBakey VA hospital to 
attempt to ascertain the source for my recurring dizzy spells. 
My next appointment with my primary care physician is next Feb, 2020. 
My next appointment with my pulmonary care specialist for my COPD (Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease) is also 
next year. 
I will do an online request to see my primary at the Katy VA outpatient clinic, but I’m not sure if that can happen within 15 
days, it is the VA, so nothing is for certain. 
I will also attempt to get an appointment with my primary care private physician in Bellville. 
I must admit that as an senior citizen and as an individual who has identified, in the onboarding process, as an individual 
with a disability and when factoring in the very problematic heart surgery and subsequent associated health issues, I am 
concerned about the way the institution and/or individuals within the institution, treat those identified as disabled, more 
specifically, myself.   
If my work was lacking, maybe I could understand, but it isn’t and I don’t understand.   
It does seem that personalities have drifted in to the equation, in my opinion. 
I appreciate your assistance and efforts with my disability and during my recovery but, I must admit that it has been an 
extremely distasteful experience with other FEMA personnel. 

I will endeavor to get the paperwork returned in a timely manner but I am concerned about the 15 day window. 

Please advise. 

___________________________________ 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.   
It may contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).   
The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to 
be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov>  
Sent: Tuesday, October 22, 2019 3:13 PM 

14

 
 
 
   
 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Wick, Timothy <Timothy.Wick@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FMLA Recertification - M. Meindl 

Good afternoon Max,  

On May 1, 2019 you were initially approved for FMLA due to a serious/chronic health condition.  Given that it has now 
been more than thirty (30) calendar days since your last medical update for your current FMLA condition, I am requesting 
that you provide me with an FMLA recertification as it relates to your current FMLA condition of record.  The 
recertification is now necessary to ensure that the workload on your team can be planned and managed effectively while 
assisting you during your time of recovery.  Therefore, I am requesting that you work with your physician to respond to 
all questions where appropriate especially those related to the questions identified below. These questions are not separate 
and apart from the recertification form but can be responded to within the context of the questions already provided on the 
form.  (29 CFR 825.308(a), permits recertification every 30 days for chronic or permanent/long-term conditions.)   

Purpose of this FMLA Recertification Update: 

  1. To validate if you are continuing to see the physician for the specific condition listed on your FMLA application dated 
and signed by your physician, on 4/11/2019.       

  2.  Request that you provide an estimate of the duration of your condition & if you will be incapacitated for a single 
continuous period of time.  (See questions #1 & #4). 

  3.  Request that you specify what dates, if any, you will have planned appointments within the next 30 days. (See 
Question #5) 

  4.  Request that your physician state whether or not you require care on an intermittent or reduced schedule basis, 
including any time for recovery.  (See Question #6) 

  5.  Request that your physician provide an estimate of when you will have flare-ups during your recovery period (if 
known) that will prevent you from performing your job functions. (See question #7). 

Your health remains of paramount concern to me as well as our mission.  My goal remains to work cooperatively with 
you and your physician in a manner which affords you the best opportunity to recover and return to full time employment 
status.  However, failure to provide this requested FMLA Recertification information within fifteen (15) working days of 
receipt will result in the denial of any FMLA related leave until the information is provided.  

If you experience difficulty providing this information within the specified period, please see me, or in my absence 
Patricia David, and provide a brief written statement documenting your hardship and your request for extension will be 
responded to within three (3) working days. 

Regards, 

Jacqueline Gause, MSc 
Human Resources 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Department of Homeland Security 
Hurricane Harvey-DR4332-TX 
Texas Recovery Office  
Houston, TX 
Mobile: 202-322-6241 

15

 
 
16

 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, October 22, 2019 4:23 PM
femamax@gmail.com
FW: FMLA Recertification - M. Meindl

___________________________________ 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.   
It may contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).   
The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to 
be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, October 22, 2019 4:22 PM 
To: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov>; David, Patricia <Patricia.David@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Wick, Timothy <Timothy.Wick@fema.dhs.gov>; TERRY, DETRA S. <DETRA.TERRY@FEMA.DHS.GOV>; Alexander, 
Dennis <dennis.alexander@fema.dhs.gov>; brent@guerradays.com; FEMA-EqualRights <FEMA-
EqualRights@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: FMLA Recertification - M. Meindl 

JG, 
My next appointment with the VA is 10/29/2019 with the ENT (ear, nose, throat) group at the DeBakey VA hospital to 
attempt to ascertain the source for my recurring dizzy spells. 
My next appointment with my primary care physician is next Feb, 2020. 
My next appointment with my pulmonary care specialist for my COPD (Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease) is also 
next year. 
I will do an online request to see my primary at the Katy VA outpatient clinic, but I’m not sure if that can happen within 15 
days, it is the VA, so nothing is for certain. 
I will also attempt to get an appointment with my primary care private physician in Bellville. 
I must admit that as an senior citizen and as an individual who has identified, in the onboarding process, as an individual 
with a disability and when factoring in the very problematic heart surgery and subsequent associated health issues, I am 
concerned about the way the institution and/or individuals within the institution, treat those identified as disabled, more 
specifically, myself.   
If my work was lacking, maybe I could understand, but it isn’t and I don’t understand.   
It does seem that personalities have drifted in to the equation, in my opinion. 

17

 
 
   
 
 
I appreciate your assistance and efforts with my disability and during my recovery but, I must admit that it has been an 
extremely distasteful experience with other FEMA personnel. 

I will endeavor to get the paperwork returned in a timely manner but I am concerned about the 15 day window. 

Please advise. 

___________________________________ 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.   
It may contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).   
The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to 
be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov>  
Sent: Tuesday, October 22, 2019 3:13 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Wick, Timothy <Timothy.Wick@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FMLA Recertification - M. Meindl 

Good afternoon Max,  

On May 1, 2019 you were initially approved for FMLA due to a serious/chronic health condition.  Given that it has now 
been more than thirty (30) calendar days since your last medical update for your current FMLA condition, I am requesting 
that you provide me with an FMLA recertification as it relates to your current FMLA condition of record.  The 
recertification is now necessary to ensure that the workload on your team can be planned and managed effectively while 
assisting you during your time of recovery.  Therefore, I am requesting that you work with your physician to respond to 
all questions where appropriate especially those related to the questions identified below. These questions are not separate 
and apart from the recertification form but can be responded to within the context of the questions already provided on the 
form.  (29 CFR 825.308(a), permits recertification every 30 days for chronic or permanent/long-term conditions.)   

Purpose of this FMLA Recertification Update: 

  1. To validate if you are continuing to see the physician for the specific condition listed on your FMLA application dated 
and signed by your physician, on 4/11/2019.       

  2.  Request that you provide an estimate of the duration of your condition & if you will be incapacitated for a single 
continuous period of time.  (See questions #1 & #4). 

  3.  Request that you specify what dates, if any, you will have planned appointments within the next 30 days. (See 
Question #5) 

18

 
 
 
   
 
 
  4.  Request that your physician state whether or not you require care on an intermittent or reduced schedule basis, 
including any time for recovery.  (See Question #6) 

  5.  Request that your physician provide an estimate of when you will have flare-ups during your recovery period (if 
known) that will prevent you from performing your job functions. (See question #7). 

Your health remains of paramount concern to me as well as our mission.  My goal remains to work cooperatively with 
you and your physician in a manner which affords you the best opportunity to recover and return to full time employment 
status.  However, failure to provide this requested FMLA Recertification information within fifteen (15) working days of 
receipt will result in the denial of any FMLA related leave until the information is provided.  

If you experience difficulty providing this information within the specified period, please see me, or in my absence 
Patricia David, and provide a brief written statement documenting your hardship and your request for extension will be 
responded to within three (3) working days. 

Regards, 

Jacqueline Gause, MSc 
Human Resources 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Department of Homeland Security 
Hurricane Harvey-DR4332-TX 
Texas Recovery Office  
Houston, TX 
Mobile: 202-322-6241 

19

 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:
Attachments:

Good afternoon Max,  

Gause, Jacqueline
Tuesday, October 22, 2019 3:13 PM
Meindl, Max
Wick, Timothy
FMLA Recertification - M. Meindl
FMLA - Health provider form.pdf

On May 1, 2019 you were initially approved for FMLA due to a serious/chronic health condition.  Given that it has now 
been more than thirty (30) calendar days since your last medical update for your current FMLA condition, I am requesting 
that you provide me with an FMLA recertification as it relates to your current FMLA condition of record.  The 
recertification is now necessary to ensure that the workload on your team can be planned and managed effectively while 
assisting you during your time of recovery.  Therefore, I am requesting that you work with your physician to respond to 
all questions where appropriate especially those related to the questions identified below. These questions are not separate 
and apart from the recertification form but can be responded to within the context of the questions already provided on the 
form.  (29 CFR 825.308(a), permits recertification every 30 days for chronic or permanent/long-term conditions.)   

Purpose of this FMLA Recertification Update: 

  1. To validate if you are continuing to see the physician for the specific condition listed on your FMLA application dated 
and signed by your physician, on 4/11/2019.       

  2.  Request that you provide an estimate of the duration of your condition & if you will be incapacitated for a single 
continuous period of time.  (See questions #1 & #4). 

  3.  Request that you specify what dates, if any, you will have planned appointments within the next 30 days. (See 
Question #5) 

  4.  Request that your physician state whether or not you require care on an intermittent or reduced schedule basis, 
including any time for recovery.  (See Question #6) 

  5.  Request that your physician provide an estimate of when you will have flare-ups during your recovery period (if 
known) that will prevent you from performing your job functions. (See question #7). 

Your health remains of paramount concern to me as well as our mission.  My goal remains to work cooperatively with 
you and your physician in a manner which affords you the best opportunity to recover and return to full time employment 
status.  However, failure to provide this requested FMLA Recertification information within fifteen (15) working days of 
receipt will result in the denial of any FMLA related leave until the information is provided.  

If you experience difficulty providing this information within the specified period, please see me, or in my absence 
Patricia David, and provide a brief written statement documenting your hardship and your request for extension will be 
responded to within three (3) working days. 

Regards, 

Jacqueline Gause, MSc 
Human Resources 

20

 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Department of Homeland Security 
Hurricane Harvey-DR4332-TX 
Texas Recovery Office  
Houston, TX 
Mobile: 202-322-6241 

21

 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Thank you. 

Vardy, Loretta
Tuesday, November 13, 2018 2:51 PM
Meindl, Max
RE: HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, November 13, 2018 3:15 PM 
To: Vardy, Loretta <Loretta.Vardy@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Vardy, Loretta  
Sent: Tuesday, November 13, 2018 2:11 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint 

Thank you Mr. Meindl.  I work with Karen who is currently on leave.  I have forwarded your message to OER.  I have 
been told to ask you to fill out the attached form and return it to me so that they can close the case out. 
Thank you, 
Loretta 

Loretta Vardy 
Branch Chief for Mediation and Training 
ADR Division/OCC/FEMA 
500 C Street SW  
4NE 2407 
Washington D.C. 20472-3400 

22

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Office: 202-212-1563 
Cell: 202-286-8804 
This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic 
communications and may contain confidential and legally privileged information.  If the reader of this message is not the 
intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this message is strictly 
prohibited.  If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message.  Thank 
you. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, November 13, 2018 11:55 AM 
To: Asaro, Karen <Karen.Asaro@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Walters, Albert <Albert.Walters@fema.dhs.gov>; Vardy, Loretta <Loretta.Vardy@fema.dhs.gov>; Meindl, Max 
<max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint 

Ms. Asaro, 
Pursuant to the above referenced case number and complaint, I am formally requesting the withdrawal of my filing. 
I am satisfied with the results of my conversations with my supervisors and feel confident that the best interest of all 
parties would be best served with the withdrawal of my complaint. 
Overall, it was an educational and enlightening experience and I would like to thank all parties who were involved in an 
pursuing and obtaining an acceptable resolution. 

Thank you. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Asaro, Karen  
Sent: Wednesday, November 7, 2018 4:10 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Automatic reply: RA Request 

Hello, 

I will be out of the office until November 23, 2018 and I will not have access to email during this time. I will respond 
promptly upon my return. 

23

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
If you need to speak with someone during my absence please call Loretta Vardy at 202 286-8804. 

Thank You, 
Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 
Washington, DC 20472 
mobile: 571 431-2863 

This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic communications and may contain confidential 
and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, 
use or copying of this message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this message in error please reply immediately to the sender and delete this 
message. Thank you. 

24

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, November 13, 2018 2:15 PM
Vardy, Loretta
RE: HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint
FEMA EEO Withdrawal Form- Letterhead-signed.pdf

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Vardy, Loretta  
Sent: Tuesday, November 13, 2018 2:11 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint 

Thank you Mr. Meindl.  I work with Karen who is currently on leave.  I have forwarded your message to OER.  I have 
been told to ask you to fill out the attached form and return it to me so that they can close the case out. 
Thank you, 
Loretta 

Loretta Vardy 
Branch Chief for Mediation and Training 
ADR Division/OCC/FEMA 
500 C Street SW  
4NE 2407 
Washington D.C. 20472-3400 

Office: 202-212-1563 
Cell: 202-286-8804 
This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic 
communications and may contain confidential and legally privileged information.  If the reader of this message is not the 
intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this message is strictly 

25

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
prohibited.  If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message.  Thank 
you. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, November 13, 2018 11:55 AM 
To: Asaro, Karen <Karen.Asaro@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Walters, Albert <Albert.Walters@fema.dhs.gov>; Vardy, Loretta <Loretta.Vardy@fema.dhs.gov>; Meindl, Max 
<max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint 

Ms. Asaro, 
Pursuant to the above referenced case number and complaint, I am formally requesting the withdrawal of my filing. 
I am satisfied with the results of my conversations with my supervisors and feel confident that the best interest of all 
parties would be best served with the withdrawal of my complaint. 
Overall, it was an educational and enlightening experience and I would like to thank all parties who were involved in an 
pursuing and obtaining an acceptable resolution. 

Thank you. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Asaro, Karen  
Sent: Wednesday, November 7, 2018 4:10 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Automatic reply: RA Request 

Hello, 

I will be out of the office until November 23, 2018 and I will not have access to email during this time. I will respond 
promptly upon my return. 

If you need to speak with someone during my absence please call Loretta Vardy at 202 286-8804. 

Thank You, 
Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 

26

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 
Washington, DC 20472 
mobile: 571 431-2863 

This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic communications and may contain confidential 
and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, 
use or copying of this message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this message in error please reply immediately to the sender and delete this 
message. Thank you. 

27

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Vardy, Loretta
Tuesday, November 13, 2018 2:11 PM
Meindl, Max
RE: HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint
FEMA EEO Withdrawal Form- Letterhead.doc

Thank you Mr. Meindl.  I work with Karen who is currently on leave.  I have forwarded your message to OER.  I have 
been told to ask you to fill out the attached form and return it to me so that they can close the case out. 
Thank you, 
Loretta 

Loretta Vardy 
Branch Chief for Mediation and Training 
ADR Division/OCC/FEMA 
500 C Street SW  
4NE 2407 
Washington D.C. 20472-3400 

Office: 202-212-1563 
Cell: 202-286-8804 
This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic 
communications and may contain confidential and legally privileged information.  If the reader of this message is not the 
intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this message is strictly 
prohibited.  If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message.  Thank 
you. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, November 13, 2018 11:55 AM 
To: Asaro, Karen <Karen.Asaro@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Walters, Albert <Albert.Walters@fema.dhs.gov>; Vardy, Loretta <Loretta.Vardy@fema.dhs.gov>; Meindl, Max 
<max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint 

Ms. Asaro, 
Pursuant to the above referenced case number and complaint, I am formally requesting the withdrawal of my filing. 
I am satisfied with the results of my conversations with my supervisors and feel confident that the best interest of all 
parties would be best served with the withdrawal of my complaint. 
Overall, it was an educational and enlightening experience and I would like to thank all parties who were involved in an 
pursuing and obtaining an acceptable resolution. 

Thank you. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 

28

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Asaro, Karen  
Sent: Wednesday, November 7, 2018 4:10 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Automatic reply: RA Request 

Hello, 

I will be out of the office until November 23, 2018 and I will not have access to email during this time. I will respond 
promptly upon my return. 

If you need to speak with someone during my absence please call Loretta Vardy at 202 286-8804. 

Thank You, 
Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 
Washington, DC 20472 
mobile: 571 431-2863 

This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic communications and may contain confidential 
and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, 
use or copying of this message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this message in error please reply immediately to the sender and delete this 
message. Thank you. 

29

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, November 13, 2018 11:19 AM
femamax@gmail.com
FW: Fed HR Review

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: McAllister, Jamie  
Sent: Friday, November 9, 2018 10:17 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Fed HR Review 

Yes, you can either attach a Word doc with your comments to your file, or you can put them in the comment box which 
looks as follows just below where you sign electronically:  

30

 
 
 
 
 
 
From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Friday, November 9, 2018 9:59 AM 
To: McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Fed HR Review 

To clarify, 
Yesterday you advised me that I could comment/upload in my evaluation pursuant to the points you initially proffered as 
concerns in my review, is that correct? 
It was nice making your acquaintance also, and here’s wishing you the best in your endeavors. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

31

 
 
 
  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: McAllister, Jamie  
Sent: Friday, November 9, 2018 9:51 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Fed HR Review 

Good Morning Max, 

Very glad to meet you yesterday. The performance comments provided by Detra have been uploaded into FedHR under 
your case #248282 and I have also attached them. I believe that I have resolved the issue of the reviews being locked. 
HR sometimes locks the forms while they are working on them, and it’s not uncommon to have this issue. Please go 
ahead and sign Quarter 2 and Quarter 3.  

Quarter 2 documents in FEDHR were your Individual Development Plan that you had previously signed and a PDF of the 
performance goals.  

Regards,  

Jamie McAllister 
Deputy Infrastructure Branch Director  
DR 4332 TX JFO Austin 
Region 6 Infrastructure Branch 
DHS/FEMA 
(202) 709-0851 Cell 
jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov 

32

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, November 13, 2018 10:55 AM
Asaro, Karen
Walters, Albert; Vardy, Loretta; Meindl, Max
RE: HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint

Ms. Asaro, 
Pursuant to the above referenced case number and complaint, I am formally requesting the withdrawal of my filing. 
I am satisfied with the results of my conversations with my supervisors and feel confident that the best interest of all 
parties would be best served with the withdrawal of my complaint. 
Overall, it was an educational and enlightening experience and I would like to thank all parties who were involved in an 
pursuing and obtaining an acceptable resolution. 

Thank you. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Asaro, Karen  
Sent: Wednesday, November 7, 2018 4:10 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Automatic reply: RA Request 

Hello, 

I will be out of the office until November 23, 2018 and I will not have access to email during this time. I will respond 
promptly upon my return. 

If you need to speak with someone during my absence please call Loretta Vardy at 202 286-8804. 

Thank You, 
Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 

33

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Washington, DC 20472 
mobile: 571 431-2863 

This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic communications and may contain confidential 
and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, 
use or copying of this message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this message in error please reply immediately to the sender and delete this 
message. Thank you. 

34

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Max, 

Walters, Albert
Tuesday, November 13, 2018 10:18 AM
Meindl, Max
RE: Mediation with Karen Asari

I am willing and we owe Karen an answer. I know she needs to report the progress on the mediation and I informed her 
that we were meeting last week. If we need to copy the lady she identified for immediate assistance we need to copy 
her on any communications with Karen. I am available today to discuss. You can call me on my cell. 

Thanks, 

Albert P. Walters III 
Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
Disaster 4332 – Harvey 
Cell Phone 504-570-4412 
Albert.Walters@FEMA.DHS.GOV 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, November 13, 2018 8:46 AM 
To: Walters, Albert <Albert.Walters@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Mediation with Karen Asari 

You and I can wrap it up Albert, if you’re willing. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

35

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From: Walters, Albert  
Sent: Friday, November 9, 2018 4:15 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Mediation with Karen Asari 

Max, 

We owe Karen an e mail or a call to discuss the mediation and your plans going forward. Do you want to have a 
discussion or do you want to set up a conference call with Karen. Let me know, I am in class next week but available on 
Tuesday for a call.. 

Albert P. Walters III 
Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
Disaster 4332 – Harvey 
Cell Phone 504-570-4412 
Albert.Walters@FEMA.DHS.GOV 

36

 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, November 13, 2018 8:50 AM
Walters, Albert
RE: Mediation with Karen Asari

Albert, 
By the way, I appreciate your professional and kind assistance, it was a welcome change and experience. 
Thank you. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Walters, Albert  
Sent: Friday, November 9, 2018 4:15 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Mediation with Karen Asari 

Max, 

We owe Karen an e mail or a call to discuss the mediation and your plans going forward. Do you want to have a 
discussion or do you want to set up a conference call with Karen. Let me know, I am in class next week but available on 
Tuesday for a call.. 

Albert P. Walters III 
Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
Disaster 4332 – Harvey 
Cell Phone 504-570-4412 
Albert.Walters@FEMA.DHS.GOV 

37

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, November 13, 2018 8:49 AM
Walters, Albert
RE: Mediation with Karen Asari

Albert, 
I received the following from Karen last week: 

Hello, 

I will be out of the office until November 23, 2018 and I will not have access to email during this time. I will respond 
promptly upon my return. 

If you need to speak with someone during my absence please call Loretta Vardy at 202 286-8804. 

Thank You, 
Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 
Washington, DC 20472 
mobile: 571 431-2863 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Walters, Albert  
Sent: Friday, November 9, 2018 4:15 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Mediation with Karen Asari 

Max, 

38

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We owe Karen an e mail or a call to discuss the mediation and your plans going forward. Do you want to have a 
discussion or do you want to set up a conference call with Karen. Let me know, I am in class next week but available on 
Tuesday for a call.. 

Albert P. Walters III 
Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
Disaster 4332 – Harvey 
Cell Phone 504-570-4412 
Albert.Walters@FEMA.DHS.GOV 

39

 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, November 13, 2018 8:46 AM
Walters, Albert
RE: Mediation with Karen Asari

You and I can wrap it up Albert, if you’re willing. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Walters, Albert  
Sent: Friday, November 9, 2018 4:15 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Mediation with Karen Asari 

Max, 

We owe Karen an e mail or a call to discuss the mediation and your plans going forward. Do you want to have a 
discussion or do you want to set up a conference call with Karen. Let me know, I am in class next week but available on 
Tuesday for a call.. 

Albert P. Walters III 
Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
Disaster 4332 – Harvey 
Cell Phone 504-570-4412 
Albert.Walters@FEMA.DHS.GOV 

40

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Max, 

Walters, Albert
Friday, November 9, 2018 4:15 PM
Meindl, Max
Mediation with Karen Asari

We owe Karen an e mail or a call to discuss the mediation and your plans going forward. Do you want to have a 
discussion or do you want to set up a conference call with Karen. Let me know, I am in class next week but available on 
Tuesday for a call.. 

Albert P. Walters III 
Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
Disaster 4332 – Harvey 
Cell Phone 504-570-4412 
Albert.Walters@FEMA.DHS.GOV 

41

 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

McAllister, Jamie
Friday, November 9, 2018 10:17 AM
Meindl, Max
Terry, Detra
RE: Fed HR Review

Yes, you can either attach a Word doc with your comments to your file, or you can put them in the comment box which 
looks as follows just below where you sign electronically:  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Friday, November 9, 2018 9:59 AM 
To: McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Fed HR Review 

To clarify, 
Yesterday you advised me that I could comment/upload in my evaluation pursuant to the points you initially proffered as 
concerns in my review, is that correct? 
It was nice making your acquaintance also, and here’s wishing you the best in your endeavors. 

42

 
 
 
 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: McAllister, Jamie  
Sent: Friday, November 9, 2018 9:51 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Fed HR Review 

Good Morning Max, 

Very glad to meet you yesterday. The performance comments provided by Detra have been uploaded into FedHR under 
your case #248282 and I have also attached them. I believe that I have resolved the issue of the reviews being locked. 
HR sometimes locks the forms while they are working on them, and it’s not uncommon to have this issue. Please go 
ahead and sign Quarter 2 and Quarter 3.  

Quarter 2 documents in FEDHR were your Individual Development Plan that you had previously signed and a PDF of the 
performance goals.  

Regards,  

Jamie McAllister 
Deputy Infrastructure Branch Director  
DR 4332 TX JFO Austin 
Region 6 Infrastructure Branch 
DHS/FEMA 
(202) 709-0851 Cell 
jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov 

43

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Greetings, 

Chatman, Edward
Friday, November 2, 2018 9:31 AM
FEMA-4332-DR-TX-All-Hands
Security Procedures for Visitors & Guests 
FEMA Directive 121-3 Revision 1.pdf

The Security Staff and Management is requesting that we all comply with the FEMA Security 
Directive 121-3, Revision 1 regarding visitors and access to FEMA facilities. 
If you are expecting visitor(s), you must provide the following information to the Security 
Manager in advance: 

-  Visitor(s) Name 
-  Affiliated Agency 
-  Point of Contact at the TRO (or Branches) 
-  Name and phone number of the person who will escort them (if different from the POC) 

Attached please find the related guidelines. If you have any questions, please contact Point of 
Contact  

Thank you! 

Regards, 

Edward Chatman 
Security Manager 
DR-4332-TX TRO 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) 
Cell: 202-803-3548 
edward.chatman@fema.dhs.gov 

44

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, October 30, 2018 11:46 AM
femamax@gmail.com
FW: OER AHU-18-164 Closure Letter
PAGS Sit With Guidance-10-26-18.pdf

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, October 30, 2018 11:45 AM 
To: Lancaster, Dacia <Dacia.Lancaster@fema.dhs.gov>; FEMA.Harassment <fema.harassment@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-AID-Administrative Investigations Directive Committee <FEMA-AID-
AdministrativeInvestigationsDirectiveCommittee@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: OER AHU-18-164 Closure Letter 

Another issue to keep in mind is that the meetings I am having concerns about were called “Sit-With”, see below.  Policy 
was violated in even calling these meetings sit-withs, in my opinion. 

-----Original Appointment-----  
From: Harrison, Jade Sent: Tuesday, August 14, 2018 6:38 PM  
To: Meindl, Max; Terry, Detra; Slie, Brian Subject: M. Meindl Sit-with  
When: Wednesday, August 15, 2018 2:00 PM-2:30 PM (UTC-06:00) Central Time (US & Canada).  
Where: Houston office- Rm 225, conference call number provided 

From the Sit With Guidance document: 
PAGS Sit-With Guidance 
What is a sit-with? 
A sit-with is a one-on-one feedback coaching session between a manager and staff.  Staff will  
participate in an initial sit-with with their manager, during which they will discuss their previous disaster roles, particular 
technical specialties and skill sets. This discussion will inform leadership on the level of complexity for a staff’s assignment. 

45

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Please note that a sit-with is a one-on-one meeting and all of these alleged “sit-withs” were group hugs without the 
benefit of the hug, more like a ganging up on the new guy. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Lancaster, Dacia  
Sent: Friday, October 19, 2018 5:38 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-AID-Administrative Investigations Directive Committee <FEMA-AID-
AdministrativeInvestigationsDirectiveCommittee@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: OER AHU-18-164 Closure Letter 

Good afternoon, 

Please see the attached response from the Office of Equal Rights, Director. 

V/r, 

Dacia Lancaster 
Anti-Harassment Unit 
Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/FEMA 

46

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, October 30, 2018 11:45 AM
Lancaster, Dacia; FEMA.Harassment
FEMA-AID-Administrative Investigations Directive Committee
RE: OER AHU-18-164 Closure Letter
PAGS Sit With Guidance-10-26-18.pdf

Another issue to keep in mind is that the meetings I am having concerns about were called “Sit-With”, see below.  Policy 
was violated in even calling these meetings sit-withs, in my opinion. 

-----Original Appointment-----  
From: Harrison, Jade Sent: Tuesday, August 14, 2018 6:38 PM  
To: Meindl, Max; Terry, Detra; Slie, Brian Subject: M. Meindl Sit-with  
When: Wednesday, August 15, 2018 2:00 PM-2:30 PM (UTC-06:00) Central Time (US & Canada).  
Where: Houston office- Rm 225, conference call number provided 

From the Sit With Guidance document: 
PAGS Sit-With Guidance 
What is a sit-with? 
A sit-with is a one-on-one feedback coaching session between a manager and staff.  Staff will  
participate in an initial sit-with with their manager, during which they will discuss their previous disaster roles, particular 
technical specialties and skill sets. This discussion will inform leadership on the level of complexity for a staff’s assignment. 

Please note that a sit-with is a one-on-one meeting and all of these alleged “sit-withs” were group hugs without the 
benefit of the hug, more like a ganging up on the new guy. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Lancaster, Dacia  
Sent: Friday, October 19, 2018 5:38 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-AID-Administrative Investigations Directive Committee <FEMA-AID-
AdministrativeInvestigationsDirectiveCommittee@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: OER AHU-18-164 Closure Letter 

47

 
 
 
 
 
 
Good afternoon, 

Please see the attached response from the Office of Equal Rights, Director. 

V/r, 

Dacia Lancaster 
Anti-Harassment Unit 
Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/FEMA 

48

 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, October 30, 2018 11:07 AM
femamax@gmail.com
FW: sit with comms
RE: M. Meindl Sit-with; RE: M. Meindl Sit-with; RE: M. Meindl Sit-with; RE: M. Meindl Sit-
with

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, September 12, 2018 1:28 PM 
To: Walters, Albert <Albert.Walters@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: sit with comms 

For your information, the sit with email chain that triggered the harassment filing. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

49

 
 
 
 
 
 
50

  
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, October 30, 2018 11:05 AM
femamax@gmail.com
FW: OER AHU-18-164 Closure Letter
Albert.pdf

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, October 30, 2018 11:03 AM 
To: Lancaster, Dacia <Dacia.Lancaster@fema.dhs.gov>; FEMA.Harassment <fema.harassment@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-OCSO-MISCON <fema-ocso-miscon@fema.dhs.gov>; Grant, Raphael <raphael.grant@fema.dhs.gov>; Hass, 
Andrew <andrew.hass@fema.dhs.gov>; Hayes, Ashton <ashton.hayes@fema.dhs.gov>; Hoburg, Leigh 
<Leigh.Hoburg@fema.dhs.gov>; Jackson, Robyne <Robyne.Jackson@fema.dhs.gov>; Jaeger, Michelle 
<michelle.jaeger@fema.dhs.gov>; Murrock, Kristin <kristin.murrock@fema.dhs.gov>; Pellicci, Kelley 
<Kelley.Pellicci@fema.dhs.gov>; Piper, Dalita <dalita.piper@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: OER AHU-18-164 Closure Letter 

To whom it may concern, 
I find the letter closing this complaint of harassment specious and inaccurate at best. 
The statement that an investigation was conducted and “witness statement” and/or “evidence collected” led to 
allegations being unsubstantiated, is interesting at a minimum. 
Pursuant to the attachment in this email and a copy of a previously sent email, sent to, what I assume to be the primary 
investigator, stipulated in no uncertain terms that there were no witnesses to the alleged harassment and that the 
harassment was my perception of an escalation or a previous meeting wherein I had been inappropriately accused and 
unprofessionally addressed in front of other parties. 
The harassment claim has to do with my perception of the escalation only, no witnesses involved. 

Below is a copy of the email stipulating my concerns when I filed the complaint: 

From: Meindl, Max  

51

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sent: Wednesday, September 12, 2018 1:19 PM 
To: Walters, Albert <Albert.Walters@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: cover email 
I am, after a couple of weeks of considerable handwringing and possible/potential blowback considerations, hereby submitting the 
attached complaint, although I am very concerned about retaliation. 
I have been falsely accused, in my opinion, and it appears the parties involved are escalating the issue to the possible detriment of my 
employment. 
I categorically deny the allegations and assertions as put forth. 
I have had a very successful tenure with FEMA since 09/2017 when deployed to the Beaumont East team. 
I was a high producer of “applicant signed projects” and continue to do the same here as demonstrated in the Grants Manager 
Metrics. 
I never had any problem with “communications” until all of the sudden I can’t seem to do anything correct in my current deployment 
here in Houston. 
I am dismayed with the process and attitude of the parties, the guilty until proven innocent prevailing mindset is inherently unfair. 
A sit-with summary by TK Shadowens before my meeting with the DPAG could best described as “Fiction” because we never discussed 
the items in his summary report and I advised he and DPAG of the same. 
Show me a specific example of the alleged “communication” or “body language” issue.   
I have been falsely accused and convicted without any consideration for my perspective or statements to clarify. 
I am submitting this to you as HR in confidence and would like to request a contact to the EEO group so I can file with them also 
because I feel this issue revolves around my disability and needs to be addressed. 
I would also request a contact to ADR so I can pursue that avenue as well. 
Please contact me with any questions, guidance, advice if required. 
Please advise soonest. 

Thank you in advance. 
Max Meindl 
832-293-3671 

FEMA PDMG 
Houston PA 
202-374-9426 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Lancaster, Dacia  
Sent: Friday, October 19, 2018 5:38 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-AID-Administrative Investigations Directive Committee <FEMA-AID-

52

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AdministrativeInvestigationsDirectiveCommittee@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: OER AHU-18-164 Closure Letter 

Good afternoon, 

Please see the attached response from the Office of Equal Rights, Director. 

V/r, 

Dacia Lancaster 
Anti-Harassment Unit 
Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/FEMA 

53

 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:

Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, October 30, 2018 11:03 AM
Lancaster, Dacia; FEMA.Harassment
FEMA-OCSO-MISCON; Grant, Raphael; Hass, Andrew; Hayes, Ashton; Hoburg, Leigh; 
Jackson, Robyne; Jaeger, Michelle; Murrock, Kristin; Pellicci, Kelley; Piper, Dalita
RE: OER AHU-18-164 Closure Letter
Albert.pdf

To whom it may concern, 
I find the letter closing this complaint of harassment specious and inaccurate at best. 
The statement that an investigation was conducted and “witness statement” and/or “evidence collected” led to 
allegations being unsubstantiated, is interesting at a minimum. 
Pursuant to the attachment in this email and a copy of a previously sent email, sent to, what I assume to be the primary 
investigator, stipulated in no uncertain terms that there were no witnesses to the alleged harassment and that the 
harassment was my perception of an escalation or a previous meeting wherein I had been inappropriately accused and 
unprofessionally addressed in front of other parties. 
The harassment claim has to do with my perception of the escalation only, no witnesses involved. 

Below is a copy of the email stipulating my concerns when I filed the complaint: 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, September 12, 2018 1:19 PM 
To: Walters, Albert <Albert.Walters@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: cover email 
I am, after a couple of weeks of considerable handwringing and possible/potential blowback considerations, hereby submitting the 
attached complaint, although I am very concerned about retaliation. 
I have been falsely accused, in my opinion, and it appears the parties involved are escalating the issue to the possible detriment of my 
employment. 
I categorically deny the allegations and assertions as put forth. 
I have had a very successful tenure with FEMA since 09/2017 when deployed to the Beaumont East team. 
I was a high producer of “applicant signed projects” and continue to do the same here as demonstrated in the Grants Manager 
Metrics. 
I never had any problem with “communications” until all of the sudden I can’t seem to do anything correct in my current deployment 
here in Houston. 
I am dismayed with the process and attitude of the parties, the guilty until proven innocent prevailing mindset is inherently unfair. 
A sit-with summary by TK Shadowens before my meeting with the DPAG could best described as “Fiction” because we never discussed 
the items in his summary report and I advised he and DPAG of the same. 
Show me a specific example of the alleged “communication” or “body language” issue.   
I have been falsely accused and convicted without any consideration for my perspective or statements to clarify. 
I am submitting this to you as HR in confidence and would like to request a contact to the EEO group so I can file with them also 
because I feel this issue revolves around my disability and needs to be addressed. 
I would also request a contact to ADR so I can pursue that avenue as well. 
Please contact me with any questions, guidance, advice if required. 
Please advise soonest. 

Thank you in advance. 
Max Meindl 
832-293-3671 

FEMA PDMG 
Houston PA 

54

 
 
 
 
202-374-9426 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Lancaster, Dacia  
Sent: Friday, October 19, 2018 5:38 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-AID-Administrative Investigations Directive Committee <FEMA-AID-
AdministrativeInvestigationsDirectiveCommittee@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: OER AHU-18-164 Closure Letter 

Good afternoon, 

Please see the attached response from the Office of Equal Rights, Director. 

V/r, 

Dacia Lancaster 
Anti-Harassment Unit 
Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/FEMA 

55

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

McAllister, Jamie
Friday, November 9, 2018 10:17 AM
Meindl, Max
Terry, Detra
RE: Fed HR Review

Yes, you can either attach a Word doc with your comments to your file, or you can put them in the comment box which 
looks as follows just below where you sign electronically:  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Friday, November 9, 2018 9:59 AM 
To: McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Fed HR Review 

To clarify, 
Yesterday you advised me that I could comment/upload in my evaluation pursuant to the points you initially proffered as 
concerns in my review, is that correct? 
It was nice making your acquaintance also, and here’s wishing you the best in your endeavors. 

1

 
 
 
 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: McAllister, Jamie  
Sent: Friday, November 9, 2018 9:51 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Fed HR Review 

Good Morning Max, 

Very glad to meet you yesterday. The performance comments provided by Detra have been uploaded into FedHR under 
your case #248282 and I have also attached them. I believe that I have resolved the issue of the reviews being locked. 
HR sometimes locks the forms while they are working on them, and it’s not uncommon to have this issue. Please go 
ahead and sign Quarter 2 and Quarter 3.  

Quarter 2 documents in FEDHR were your Individual Development Plan that you had previously signed and a PDF of the 
performance goals.  

Regards,  

Jamie McAllister 
Deputy Infrastructure Branch Director  
DR 4332 TX JFO Austin 
Region 6 Infrastructure Branch 
DHS/FEMA 
(202) 709-0851 Cell 
jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov 

2

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Greetings, 

Chatman, Edward
Friday, November 2, 2018 9:31 AM
FEMA-4332-DR-TX-All-Hands
Security Procedures for Visitors & Guests 
FEMA Directive 121-3 Revision 1.pdf

The Security Staff and Management is requesting that we all comply with the FEMA Security 
Directive 121-3, Revision 1 regarding visitors and access to FEMA facilities. 
If you are expecting visitor(s), you must provide the following information to the Security 
Manager in advance: 

-  Visitor(s) Name 
-  Affiliated Agency 
-  Point of Contact at the TRO (or Branches) 
-  Name and phone number of the person who will escort them (if different from the POC) 

Attached please find the related guidelines. If you have any questions, please contact Point of 
Contact  

Thank you! 

Regards, 

Edward Chatman 
Security Manager 
DR-4332-TX TRO 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) 
Cell: 202-803-3548 
edward.chatman@fema.dhs.gov 

3

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, October 30, 2018 11:46 AM
femamax@gmail.com
FW: OER AHU-18-164 Closure Letter
PAGS Sit With Guidance-10-26-18.pdf

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, October 30, 2018 11:45 AM 
To: Lancaster, Dacia <Dacia.Lancaster@fema.dhs.gov>; FEMA.Harassment <fema.harassment@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-AID-Administrative Investigations Directive Committee <FEMA-AID-
AdministrativeInvestigationsDirectiveCommittee@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: OER AHU-18-164 Closure Letter 

Another issue to keep in mind is that the meetings I am having concerns about were called “Sit-With”, see below.  Policy 
was violated in even calling these meetings sit-withs, in my opinion. 

-----Original Appointment-----  
From: Harrison, Jade Sent: Tuesday, August 14, 2018 6:38 PM  
To: Meindl, Max; Terry, Detra; Slie, Brian Subject: M. Meindl Sit-with  
When: Wednesday, August 15, 2018 2:00 PM-2:30 PM (UTC-06:00) Central Time (US & Canada).  
Where: Houston office- Rm 225, conference call number provided 

From the Sit With Guidance document: 
PAGS Sit-With Guidance 
What is a sit-with? 
A sit-with is a one-on-one feedback coaching session between a manager and staff.  Staff will  
participate in an initial sit-with with their manager, during which they will discuss their previous disaster roles, particular 
technical specialties and skill sets. This discussion will inform leadership on the level of complexity for a staff’s assignment. 

4

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Please note that a sit-with is a one-on-one meeting and all of these alleged “sit-withs” were group hugs without the 
benefit of the hug, more like a ganging up on the new guy. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Lancaster, Dacia  
Sent: Friday, October 19, 2018 5:38 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-AID-Administrative Investigations Directive Committee <FEMA-AID-
AdministrativeInvestigationsDirectiveCommittee@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: OER AHU-18-164 Closure Letter 

Good afternoon, 

Please see the attached response from the Office of Equal Rights, Director. 

V/r, 

Dacia Lancaster 
Anti-Harassment Unit 
Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/FEMA 

5

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, October 30, 2018 11:45 AM
Lancaster, Dacia; FEMA.Harassment
FEMA-AID-Administrative Investigations Directive Committee
RE: OER AHU-18-164 Closure Letter
PAGS Sit With Guidance-10-26-18.pdf

Another issue to keep in mind is that the meetings I am having concerns about were called “Sit-With”, see below.  Policy 
was violated in even calling these meetings sit-withs, in my opinion. 

-----Original Appointment-----  
From: Harrison, Jade Sent: Tuesday, August 14, 2018 6:38 PM  
To: Meindl, Max; Terry, Detra; Slie, Brian Subject: M. Meindl Sit-with  
When: Wednesday, August 15, 2018 2:00 PM-2:30 PM (UTC-06:00) Central Time (US & Canada).  
Where: Houston office- Rm 225, conference call number provided 

From the Sit With Guidance document: 
PAGS Sit-With Guidance 
What is a sit-with? 
A sit-with is a one-on-one feedback coaching session between a manager and staff.  Staff will  
participate in an initial sit-with with their manager, during which they will discuss their previous disaster roles, particular 
technical specialties and skill sets. This discussion will inform leadership on the level of complexity for a staff’s assignment. 

Please note that a sit-with is a one-on-one meeting and all of these alleged “sit-withs” were group hugs without the 
benefit of the hug, more like a ganging up on the new guy. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Lancaster, Dacia  
Sent: Friday, October 19, 2018 5:38 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-AID-Administrative Investigations Directive Committee <FEMA-AID-
AdministrativeInvestigationsDirectiveCommittee@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: OER AHU-18-164 Closure Letter 

6

 
 
 
 
 
 
Good afternoon, 

Please see the attached response from the Office of Equal Rights, Director. 

V/r, 

Dacia Lancaster 
Anti-Harassment Unit 
Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/FEMA 

7

 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, October 30, 2018 11:07 AM
femamax@gmail.com
FW: sit with comms
RE: M. Meindl Sit-with; RE: M. Meindl Sit-with; RE: M. Meindl Sit-with; RE: M. Meindl Sit-
with

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, September 12, 2018 1:28 PM 
To: Walters, Albert <Albert.Walters@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: sit with comms 

For your information, the sit with email chain that triggered the harassment filing. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

8

 
 
 
 
 
 
9

  
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, October 30, 2018 11:05 AM
femamax@gmail.com
FW: OER AHU-18-164 Closure Letter
Albert.pdf

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, October 30, 2018 11:03 AM 
To: Lancaster, Dacia <Dacia.Lancaster@fema.dhs.gov>; FEMA.Harassment <fema.harassment@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-OCSO-MISCON <fema-ocso-miscon@fema.dhs.gov>; Grant, Raphael <raphael.grant@fema.dhs.gov>; Hass, 
Andrew <andrew.hass@fema.dhs.gov>; Hayes, Ashton <ashton.hayes@fema.dhs.gov>; Hoburg, Leigh 
<Leigh.Hoburg@fema.dhs.gov>; Jackson, Robyne <Robyne.Jackson@fema.dhs.gov>; Jaeger, Michelle 
<michelle.jaeger@fema.dhs.gov>; Murrock, Kristin <kristin.murrock@fema.dhs.gov>; Pellicci, Kelley 
<Kelley.Pellicci@fema.dhs.gov>; Piper, Dalita <dalita.piper@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: OER AHU-18-164 Closure Letter 

To whom it may concern, 
I find the letter closing this complaint of harassment specious and inaccurate at best. 
The statement that an investigation was conducted and “witness statement” and/or “evidence collected” led to 
allegations being unsubstantiated, is interesting at a minimum. 
Pursuant to the attachment in this email and a copy of a previously sent email, sent to, what I assume to be the primary 
investigator, stipulated in no uncertain terms that there were no witnesses to the alleged harassment and that the 
harassment was my perception of an escalation or a previous meeting wherein I had been inappropriately accused and 
unprofessionally addressed in front of other parties. 
The harassment claim has to do with my perception of the escalation only, no witnesses involved. 

Below is a copy of the email stipulating my concerns when I filed the complaint: 

From: Meindl, Max  

10

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sent: Wednesday, September 12, 2018 1:19 PM 
To: Walters, Albert <Albert.Walters@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: cover email 
I am, after a couple of weeks of considerable handwringing and possible/potential blowback considerations, hereby submitting the 
attached complaint, although I am very concerned about retaliation. 
I have been falsely accused, in my opinion, and it appears the parties involved are escalating the issue to the possible detriment of my 
employment. 
I categorically deny the allegations and assertions as put forth. 
I have had a very successful tenure with FEMA since 09/2017 when deployed to the Beaumont East team. 
I was a high producer of “applicant signed projects” and continue to do the same here as demonstrated in the Grants Manager 
Metrics. 
I never had any problem with “communications” until all of the sudden I can’t seem to do anything correct in my current deployment 
here in Houston. 
I am dismayed with the process and attitude of the parties, the guilty until proven innocent prevailing mindset is inherently unfair. 
A sit-with summary by TK Shadowens before my meeting with the DPAG could best described as “Fiction” because we never discussed 
the items in his summary report and I advised he and DPAG of the same. 
Show me a specific example of the alleged “communication” or “body language” issue.   
I have been falsely accused and convicted without any consideration for my perspective or statements to clarify. 
I am submitting this to you as HR in confidence and would like to request a contact to the EEO group so I can file with them also 
because I feel this issue revolves around my disability and needs to be addressed. 
I would also request a contact to ADR so I can pursue that avenue as well. 
Please contact me with any questions, guidance, advice if required. 
Please advise soonest. 

Thank you in advance. 
Max Meindl 
832-293-3671 

FEMA PDMG 
Houston PA 
202-374-9426 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Lancaster, Dacia  
Sent: Friday, October 19, 2018 5:38 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-AID-Administrative Investigations Directive Committee <FEMA-AID-

11

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AdministrativeInvestigationsDirectiveCommittee@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: OER AHU-18-164 Closure Letter 

Good afternoon, 

Please see the attached response from the Office of Equal Rights, Director. 

V/r, 

Dacia Lancaster 
Anti-Harassment Unit 
Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/FEMA 

12

 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:

Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, October 30, 2018 11:03 AM
Lancaster, Dacia; FEMA.Harassment
FEMA-OCSO-MISCON; Grant, Raphael; Hass, Andrew; Hayes, Ashton; Hoburg, Leigh; 
Jackson, Robyne; Jaeger, Michelle; Murrock, Kristin; Pellicci, Kelley; Piper, Dalita
RE: OER AHU-18-164 Closure Letter
Albert.pdf

To whom it may concern, 
I find the letter closing this complaint of harassment specious and inaccurate at best. 
The statement that an investigation was conducted and “witness statement” and/or “evidence collected” led to 
allegations being unsubstantiated, is interesting at a minimum. 
Pursuant to the attachment in this email and a copy of a previously sent email, sent to, what I assume to be the primary 
investigator, stipulated in no uncertain terms that there were no witnesses to the alleged harassment and that the 
harassment was my perception of an escalation or a previous meeting wherein I had been inappropriately accused and 
unprofessionally addressed in front of other parties. 
The harassment claim has to do with my perception of the escalation only, no witnesses involved. 

Below is a copy of the email stipulating my concerns when I filed the complaint: 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, September 12, 2018 1:19 PM 
To: Walters, Albert <Albert.Walters@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: cover email 
I am, after a couple of weeks of considerable handwringing and possible/potential blowback considerations, hereby submitting the 
attached complaint, although I am very concerned about retaliation. 
I have been falsely accused, in my opinion, and it appears the parties involved are escalating the issue to the possible detriment of my 
employment. 
I categorically deny the allegations and assertions as put forth. 
I have had a very successful tenure with FEMA since 09/2017 when deployed to the Beaumont East team. 
I was a high producer of “applicant signed projects” and continue to do the same here as demonstrated in the Grants Manager 
Metrics. 
I never had any problem with “communications” until all of the sudden I can’t seem to do anything correct in my current deployment 
here in Houston. 
I am dismayed with the process and attitude of the parties, the guilty until proven innocent prevailing mindset is inherently unfair. 
A sit-with summary by TK Shadowens before my meeting with the DPAG could best described as “Fiction” because we never discussed 
the items in his summary report and I advised he and DPAG of the same. 
Show me a specific example of the alleged “communication” or “body language” issue.   
I have been falsely accused and convicted without any consideration for my perspective or statements to clarify. 
I am submitting this to you as HR in confidence and would like to request a contact to the EEO group so I can file with them also 
because I feel this issue revolves around my disability and needs to be addressed. 
I would also request a contact to ADR so I can pursue that avenue as well. 
Please contact me with any questions, guidance, advice if required. 
Please advise soonest. 

Thank you in advance. 
Max Meindl 
832-293-3671 

FEMA PDMG 
Houston PA 

13

 
 
 
 
202-374-9426 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Lancaster, Dacia  
Sent: Friday, October 19, 2018 5:38 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-AID-Administrative Investigations Directive Committee <FEMA-AID-
AdministrativeInvestigationsDirectiveCommittee@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: OER AHU-18-164 Closure Letter 

Good afternoon, 

Please see the attached response from the Office of Equal Rights, Director. 

V/r, 

Dacia Lancaster 
Anti-Harassment Unit 
Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/FEMA 

14

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:
Attachments:

Good afternoon, 

Lancaster, Dacia
Friday, October 19, 2018 5:38 PM
Meindl, Max
FEMA-AID-Administrative Investigations Directive Committee
OER AHU-18-164 Closure Letter
scannedDoc (007).pdf

Please see the attached response from the Office of Equal Rights, Director. 

V/r, 

Dacia Lancaster 
Anti-Harassment Unit 
Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/FEMA 

15

 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Castaneda, Melinda
Monday, October 15, 2018 11:14 AM
FEMA-4332-DR-TX-All-Hands
TRO-ADR Continuous Availability

See important message from ADR.  Thank you. 

Please forward your questions to the appropriate Point of Contact 

Greetings, 

I’m writing to let you know that I will be out on rotation until 10/29. I will still be 
intermittently available via phone/e-mail. 

ADR Advisor Sunny Gutierrez will be here at the TRO while I’m out.  Sunny served 
the Texas Mission previously, so she may be familiar to some of you. 
ADR Advisors Judy Gordon and Carl McGill will continue serving at Branch II Houston 
and providing coverage for Branch III. 

Please feel free to contact any of us. 

Thank you for all you do, every day.   
Take good care of yourselves and each other. 

Aileen  

AILEEN DENTON SETTER 
Alternative Dispute Resolution Advisor 
Texas Recovery Office 
11000 North Interstate Highway 35 
Austin, TX  78753 
FEMA iPhone:  (225) 910-5254 
E-mail: Aileen.DentonSetter@fema.dhs.gov  

16

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, October 9, 2018 9:43 AM
Asaro, Karen; Walters, Albert
RE: HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint

I am available as required  and at any time convenient to all parties. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Asaro, Karen  
Sent: Sunday, October 7, 2018 3:20 PM 
To: Walters, Albert <Albert.Walters@fema.dhs.gov>; Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint 

Thank you.  As soon as I hear from Mr. Meindl, I will confirm the date/time. 

Karen 

Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 
Washington, DC 20472 
Phone: 571 431-2863 

This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic 
communication and may contain confidential and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is 
not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this 
message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and 
delete this message. Thank you. 

From: Walters, Albert  
Sent: Saturday, October 6, 2018 9:06 AM 

17

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To: Asaro, Karen <Karen.Asaro@fema.dhs.gov>; Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint 

Good morning Ms. Asaro, 

My availability for a discussion with Mr. Meindl over the next 2 weeks is: 

October 11, 2018 – From 10:00am until 2:00pm 
October 12, 2018 – From 10:00am until 2:00pm 
October 15, 2018 – From 11:00am until 3:00pm 
October 17, 2018 – From 1:00pm until 2:00pm 
October 19, 2018 – From 10:00am until 2:00pm 

Thanks, 

Albert P. Walters III 
Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
Disaster 4332 – Harvey 
Cell Phone 504-570-4412 
Albert.Walters@FEMA.DHS.GOV 

From: Asaro, Karen  
Sent: Sunday, September 30, 2018 12:10 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>; Walters, Albert <Albert.Walters@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint 

Hello Mr. Meindl and Mr. Walters, 

I received an email from Erik Skinner, OER, on Friday letting me know that things are on track for scheduling the 
mediation conference call. 

I will be at a mediation conference this week (week of Oct. 1) and unavailable for mediation.  If you could send me some 
dates you are available the week of Oct. 8 and the week of Oct. 15,  I will coordinate with all of our schedules, and 
confirm the first date/time that works for everyone. 

Thank you for your assistance with scheduling and I look forward to hearing from you, 

Karen 

Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 
Washington, DC 20472 
Phone: 571 431-2863 

This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic 
communication and may contain confidential and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is 
not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this 

18

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and 
delete this message. Thank you. 

19

 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Asaro, Karen
Sunday, October 7, 2018 3:20 PM
Walters, Albert; Meindl, Max
RE: HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint

Thank you.  As soon as I hear from Mr. Meindl, I will confirm the date/time. 

Karen 

Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 
Washington, DC 20472 
Phone: 571 431-2863 

This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic 
communication and may contain confidential and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is 
not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this 
message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and 
delete this message. Thank you. 

From: Walters, Albert  
Sent: Saturday, October 6, 2018 9:06 AM 
To: Asaro, Karen <Karen.Asaro@fema.dhs.gov>; Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint 

Good morning Ms. Asaro, 

My availability for a discussion with Mr. Meindl over the next 2 weeks is: 

October 11, 2018 – From 10:00am until 2:00pm 
October 12, 2018 – From 10:00am until 2:00pm 
October 15, 2018 – From 11:00am until 3:00pm 
October 17, 2018 – From 1:00pm until 2:00pm 
October 19, 2018 – From 10:00am until 2:00pm 

Thanks, 

Albert P. Walters III 
Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
Disaster 4332 – Harvey 
Cell Phone 504-570-4412 
Albert.Walters@FEMA.DHS.GOV 

20

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From: Asaro, Karen  
Sent: Sunday, September 30, 2018 12:10 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>; Walters, Albert <Albert.Walters@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint 

Hello Mr. Meindl and Mr. Walters, 

I received an email from Erik Skinner, OER, on Friday letting me know that things are on track for scheduling the 
mediation conference call. 

I will be at a mediation conference this week (week of Oct. 1) and unavailable for mediation.  If you could send me some 
dates you are available the week of Oct. 8 and the week of Oct. 15,  I will coordinate with all of our schedules, and 
confirm the first date/time that works for everyone. 

Thank you for your assistance with scheduling and I look forward to hearing from you, 

Karen 

Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 
Washington, DC 20472 
Phone: 571 431-2863 

This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic 
communication and may contain confidential and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is 
not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this 
message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and 
delete this message. Thank you. 

21

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Good morning Ms. Asaro, 

Walters, Albert
Saturday, October 6, 2018 8:06 AM
Asaro, Karen; Meindl, Max
RE: HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint

My availability for a discussion with Mr. Meindl over the next 2 weeks is: 

October 11, 2018 – From 10:00am until 2:00pm 
October 12, 2018 – From 10:00am until 2:00pm 
October 15, 2018 – From 11:00am until 3:00pm 
October 17, 2018 – From 1:00pm until 2:00pm 
October 19, 2018 – From 10:00am until 2:00pm 

Thanks, 

Albert P. Walters III 
Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
Disaster 4332 – Harvey 
Cell Phone 504-570-4412 
Albert.Walters@FEMA.DHS.GOV 

From: Asaro, Karen  
Sent: Sunday, September 30, 2018 12:10 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>; Walters, Albert <Albert.Walters@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint 

Hello Mr. Meindl and Mr. Walters, 

I received an email from Erik Skinner, OER, on Friday letting me know that things are on track for scheduling the 
mediation conference call. 

I will be at a mediation conference this week (week of Oct. 1) and unavailable for mediation.  If you could send me some 
dates you are available the week of Oct. 8 and the week of Oct. 15,  I will coordinate with all of our schedules, and 
confirm the first date/time that works for everyone. 

Thank you for your assistance with scheduling and I look forward to hearing from you, 

Karen 

Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 
Washington, DC 20472 

22

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Phone: 571 431-2863 

This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic 
communication and may contain confidential and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is 
not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this 
message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and 
delete this message. Thank you. 

23

 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Asaro, Karen
Sunday, September 30, 2018 12:10 PM
Meindl, Max; Walters, Albert
HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint

Hello Mr. Meindl and Mr. Walters, 

I received an email from Erik Skinner, OER, on Friday letting me know that things are on track for scheduling the 
mediation conference call. 

I will be at a mediation conference this week (week of Oct. 1) and unavailable for mediation.  If you could send me some 
dates you are available the week of Oct. 8 and the week of Oct. 15,  I will coordinate with all of our schedules, and 
confirm the first date/time that works for everyone. 

Thank you for your assistance with scheduling and I look forward to hearing from you, 

Karen 

Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 
Washington, DC 20472 
Phone: 571 431-2863 

This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic 
communication and may contain confidential and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is 
not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this 
message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and 
delete this message. Thank you. 

24

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

For the file. 

Meindl, Max
Thursday, September 13, 2018 9:00 AM
Walters, Albert
ADDITIONAL STATEMENT
Albert.pdf

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

25

 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, September 12, 2018 1:28 PM
Walters, Albert
sit with comms
RE: M. Meindl Sit-with; RE: M. Meindl Sit-with; RE: M. Meindl Sit-with; RE: M. Meindl Sit-
with

For your information, the sit with email chain that triggered the harassment filing. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

26

 
  
 
Meindl, Max

Subject:
Location:

Start:
End:
Show Time As:

Canceled: M. Meindl Sit-with
Houston office- Rm 225, conference call number provided

Wed 8/15/2018 2:00 PM
Wed 8/15/2018 2:30 PM
Free

Recurrence:

(none)

Meeting Status:

Not yet responded

Organizer:
Required Attendees:

Harrison, Jade
Meindl, Max; Terry, Detra; Slie, Brian

Importance:

High

Brian, 

You can use the below number to conference in tomorrow. 

Conference Call number: 
1-800-320-4330 

PIN: 892515 

27

 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Albert, 
Per your request. 

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, September 12, 2018 1:19 PM
Walters, Albert
cover email

I am, after a couple of weeks of considerable handwringing and possible/potential blowback considerations, hereby 
submitting the attached complaint, although I am very concerned about retaliation. 
I have been falsely accused, in my opinion, and it appears the parties involved are escalating the issue to the possible 
detriment of my employment. 
I categorically deny the allegations and assertions as put forth. 
I have had a very successful tenure with FEMA since 09/2017 when deployed to the Beaumont East team. 
I was a high producer of “applicant signed projects” and continue to do the same here as demonstrated in the Grants 
Manager Metrics. 
I never had any problem with “communications” until all of the sudden I can’t seem to do anything correct in my current 
deployment here in Houston. 
I am dismayed with the process and attitude of the parties, the guilty until proven innocent prevailing mindset is 
inherently unfair. 
A sit-with summary by TK Shadowens before my meeting with the DPAG could best described as “Fiction” because we 
never discussed the items in his summary report and I advised he and DPAG of the same. 
Show me a specific example of the alleged “communication” or “body language” issue.   
I have been falsely accused and convicted without any consideration for my perspective or statements to clarify. 
I am submitting this to you as HR in confidence and would like to request a contact to the EEO group so I can file with 
them also because I feel this issue revolves around my disability and needs to be addressed. 
I would also request a contact to ADR so I can pursue that avenue as well. 
Please contact me with any questions, guidance, advice if required. 
Please advise soonest. 

Thank you in advance. 
Max Meindl 
832-293-3671 

FEMA PDMG 
Houston PA 
202-374-9426 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

28

 
 
 
 
  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

29

 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Hello Mr. Walters, 

Asaro, Karen
Wednesday, September 12, 2018 9:55 AM
Walters, Albert; Meindl, Max
RE: EEO Mediation

I assumed as much and just wanted to clarify for Mr. Meindl that your meeting was not the mediation session since he 
forwarded the meeting request to me. 

Thanks, 
Karen 

Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 
Washington, DC 20472 
Phone: 571 431-2863 

This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic 
communication and may contain confidential and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is 
not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this 
message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and 
delete this message. Thank you. 

From: Walters, Albert  
Sent: Wednesday, September 12, 2018 10:53 AM 
To: Asaro, Karen <Karen.Asaro@fema.dhs.gov>; Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Re: EEO Mediation 

Karen, 

This meeting is in reference to a harassment complaint Max has filed. 

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Asaro, Karen 
Sent: Wednesday, September 12, 2018 9:23:57 AM 
To: Meindl, Max; Walters, Albert 
Subject: EEO Mediation  

Hello Mr. Meindl and Mr. Walters, 

Mr. Meindl forwarded a meeting request to me which as I understand it, Mr. Walters is requesting a meeting with Mr. 
Meindl to discuss the EEO complaint. 

30

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
I am writing to clarify that this meeting is NOT part of the mediation conference call I am trying to schedule once I know 
both parties’ availability. 

Thank you, 

Karen 

Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 
Washington, DC 20472 
Phone: 571 431-2863 

This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic 
communication and may contain confidential and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is 
not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this 
message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and 
delete this message. Thank you. 

31

  
  
  
  
 
  
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Karen, 

Walters, Albert
Wednesday, September 12, 2018 9:53 AM
Asaro, Karen; Meindl, Max
Re: EEO Mediation

This meeting is in reference to a harassment complaint Max has filed. 

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Asaro, Karen 
Sent: Wednesday, September 12, 2018 9:23:57 AM 
To: Meindl, Max; Walters, Albert 
Subject: EEO Mediation  

Hello Mr. Meindl and Mr. Walters, 

Mr. Meindl forwarded a meeting request to me which as I understand it, Mr. Walters is requesting a meeting with Mr. 
Meindl to discuss the EEO complaint. 

I am writing to clarify that this meeting is NOT part of the mediation conference call I am trying to schedule once I know 
both parties’ availability. 

Thank you, 

Karen 

Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 
Washington, DC 20472 
Phone: 571 431-2863 

This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic 
communication and may contain confidential and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is 
not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this 
message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and 
delete this message. Thank you. 

32

 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Asaro, Karen
Wednesday, September 12, 2018 9:24 AM
Meindl, Max; Walters, Albert
EEO Mediation

Hello Mr. Meindl and Mr. Walters, 

Mr. Meindl forwarded a meeting request to me which as I understand it, Mr. Walters is requesting a meeting with Mr. 
Meindl to discuss the EEO complaint. 

I am writing to clarify that this meeting is NOT part of the mediation conference call I am trying to schedule once I know 
both parties’ availability. 

Thank you, 

Karen 

Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 
Washington, DC 20472 
Phone: 571 431-2863 

This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic 
communication and may contain confidential and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is 
not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this 
message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and 
delete this message. Thank you. 

33

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, September 12, 2018 9:23 AM
Walters, Albert
Accepted: Statement Concerning - Harassment 

34

 
Meindl, Max

Subject:
Location:

Start:
End:

Statement Concerning - Harassment 
My Office 

Wed 9/12/2018 1:00 PM
Wed 9/12/2018 2:00 PM

Recurrence:

(none)

Meeting Status:

Accepted

Organizer:
Required Attendees:
Optional Attendees:

Walters, Albert
Walters, Albert; Meindl, Max
Asaro, Karen; Jordan, Lakeisha

Good Evening Max, 

I would like to get your statement concerning your complaint. Please be prepared to discuss the issue.. 

Albert 

35

 
 
Meindl, Max

Subject:
Location:

Start:
End:

Statement Concerning - Harassment 
My Office 

Wed 9/12/2018 1:00 PM
Wed 9/12/2018 2:00 PM

Recurrence:

(none)

Meeting Status:

Accepted

Organizer:
Required Attendees:
Optional Attendees:

Walters, Albert
Walters, Albert; Meindl, Max
Asaro, Karen; Jordan, Lakeisha

Good Evening Max, 

I would like to get your statement concerning your complaint. Please be prepared to discuss the issue.. 

Albert 

36

 
 
Meindl, Max

Subject:
Location:

Start:
End:

Statement Concerning - Harassment 
My Office 

Wed 9/12/2018 1:00 PM
Wed 9/12/2018 2:00 PM

Recurrence:

(none)

Meeting Status:

Accepted

Organizer:
Required Attendees:
Optional Attendees:

Walters, Albert
Walters, Albert; Meindl, Max
Asaro, Karen; Jordan, Lakeisha

Good Evening Max, 

I would like to get your statement concerning your complaint. Please be prepared to discuss the issue.. 

Albert 

37

 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

10-4 

Meindl, Max
Thursday, September 6, 2018 9:36 AM
Asaro, Karen
RE: mediation conference call

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Asaro, Karen  
Sent: Thursday, September 6, 2018 8:35 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: mediation conference call 

Hello Mr. Meindl, 

I am still waiting to hear back from Mr. Walters regarding his availability.  I will let you know once I have heard from him. 

Thanks, 
Karen 

Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 
Washington, DC 20472 
Phone: 571 431-2863 

This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic 
communication and may contain confidential and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is 
not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this 
message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and 
delete this message. Thank you. 

38

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, September 4, 2018 3:13 PM 
To: Asaro, Karen <Karen.Asaro@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: mediation conference call 

1.  Thursday before 1:00 PM,  
2.  Wed. next week 09:00 to 15:00,  
3.  Thursday next week 09:00 to 15:00. 

I am in the office until about noon tomorrow but not sure about availability of a tele-conference room or anything. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Asaro, Karen  
Sent: Tuesday, September 4, 2018 1:56 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: mediation conference call 

Hello Mr. Meindl, 

Thank you for speaking with me today regarding the mediation conference call.  If you can send me several dates that 
you are available for scheduling mediation,  I will coordinate with Mr. Walters’ availability and confirm the earliest date 
that works with everyone’s schedule. 

Thank you, 

Karen 

Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 
Washington, DC 20472 
Phone: 571 431-2863 

This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic 
communication and may contain confidential and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is 

39

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this 
message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and 
delete this message. Thank you. 

40

 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Hello Mr. Meindl, 

Asaro, Karen
Thursday, September 6, 2018 8:35 AM
Meindl, Max
RE: mediation conference call

I am still waiting to hear back from Mr. Walters regarding his availability.  I will let you know once I have heard from him. 

Thanks, 
Karen 

Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 
Washington, DC 20472 
Phone: 571 431-2863 

This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic 
communication and may contain confidential and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is 
not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this 
message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and 
delete this message. Thank you. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, September 4, 2018 3:13 PM 
To: Asaro, Karen <Karen.Asaro@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: mediation conference call 

1.  Thursday before 1:00 PM,  
2.  Wed. next week 09:00 to 15:00,  
3.  Thursday next week 09:00 to 15:00. 

I am in the office until about noon tomorrow but not sure about availability of a tele-conference room or anything. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

41

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Asaro, Karen  
Sent: Tuesday, September 4, 2018 1:56 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: mediation conference call 

Hello Mr. Meindl, 

Thank you for speaking with me today regarding the mediation conference call.  If you can send me several dates that 
you are available for scheduling mediation,  I will coordinate with Mr. Walters’ availability and confirm the earliest date 
that works with everyone’s schedule. 

Thank you, 

Karen 

Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 
Washington, DC 20472 
Phone: 571 431-2863 

This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic 
communication and may contain confidential and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is 
not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this 
message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and 
delete this message. Thank you. 

42

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Done  

Get Outlook for iOS 

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, September 5, 2018 6:37 PM
Jones, Patricia
Re: IBD

From: Jones, Patricia 
Sent: Wednesday, September 5, 2018 3:12:18 PM 
To: Meindl, Max 
Cc: Boone, William; Slie, Brian 
Subject: IBD  

Good Afternoon, 

We have recently sent out your IBD, you can locate this in FED HR.   As of today yours has not been signed.  Please go 
into this site by COB tomorrow and sign these documents.   They will be reviewed on Friday by the Branch Director and 
Chief of Staff. 

Should you need assistance please contact me, 

Thanks so much, 
  Trisha 
Patricia Jones  
PA Ops Support Crew Leader 
DR-4332-TX 
202-706-2160 FEMA 

Patricia.jones1@fema.dhs.gov 

If nothing ever changed there’d be no Butterflies… 
With honor and integrity, we will safeguard the American people, our homeland, and our values. 

43

 
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Jones, Patricia
Wednesday, September 5, 2018 3:16 PM
Meindl, Max
IDP's 

Importance:

High

This is correcting the Subject line of the last email.    
It should read IDP.    Sorry for the error 

  Trisha 
Patricia Jones  
PA Ops Support Crew Leader 
DR-4332-TX 
202-706-2160 FEMA 

Patricia.jones1@fema.dhs.gov 

If nothing ever changed there’d be no Butterflies… 
With honor and integrity, we will safeguard the American people, our homeland, and our values. 

44

 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Good Afternoon, 

Jones, Patricia
Wednesday, September 5, 2018 3:12 PM
Meindl, Max
Boone, William; Slie, Brian
IBD

We have recently sent out your IBD, you can locate this in FED HR.   As of today yours has not been signed.  Please go 
into this site by COB tomorrow and sign these documents.   They will be reviewed on Friday by the Branch Director and 
Chief of Staff. 

Should you need assistance please contact me, 

Thanks so much, 
  Trisha 
Patricia Jones  
PA Ops Support Crew Leader 
DR-4332-TX 
202-706-2160 FEMA 

Patricia.jones1@fema.dhs.gov 

If nothing ever changed there’d be no Butterflies… 
With honor and integrity, we will safeguard the American people, our homeland, and our values. 

45

 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Good Afternoon, 

Jones, Patricia
Wednesday, September 5, 2018 3:08 PM
Meindl, Max
Boone, William; Slie, Brian
IBD 

We have recently sent out your IBD, you can locate this in FED HR.   As of today yours has not been signed.  Please go 
into this site by COB tomorrow and sign these documents.   They will be reviewed on Friday by the Branch Director and 
Chief of Staff. 

Should you need assistance please contact me, 

Thanks so much, 
  Trisha 
Patricia Jones  
PA Ops Support Crew Leader 
DR-4332-TX 
202-706-2160 FEMA 

Patricia.jones1@fema.dhs.gov 

If nothing ever changed there’d be no Butterflies… 
With honor and integrity, we will safeguard the American people, our homeland, and our values. 

46

 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

FYI 

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, September 5, 2018 10:55 AM
Jordan, Lakeisha
RE: Request for Availability - OER AHU Intake
Max Meindl-affidavit-signed.pdf

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Jordan, Lakeisha  
Sent: Wednesday, September 5, 2018 10:08 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Request for Availability - OER AHU Intake 

Good morning, Max,  

Thank you for your response. Are you still available to speak this morning before noon? If so, I will give you a call.  

If you are no longer available today, I will send you a calendar invite to speak tomorrow around 10:30AM.  

Thanks,  

Lakeisha Jordan 
Office of Equal Rights │ FEMA  
(202) 531-2978  

For Official Use Only - Privacy Act Sensitive. This document was prepared by DHS/FEMA and is covered by federal and 
state law governing electronic communications.  It may contain confidential, pre-decisional, and/or sensitive Government 
information, and is not for release, review, retransmission, dissemination or use by anyone other than the intended 

47

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
recipient.  Please consult the original sender before disclosing any information contained herein.  If you have received this 
in error, please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, September 4, 2018 4:34 PM 
To: Jordan, Lakeisha <lakeisha.jordan@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Request for Availability - OER AHU Intake 

Tomorrow before noon, Thursday before noon. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Jordan, Lakeisha  
Sent: Tuesday, September 4, 2018 3:31 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Request for Availability - OER AHU Intake 

Good afternoon, Max,  

I am an EEO Specialist in the Office of Equal Rights and your case was recently reassigned to me to conduct an 
intake on behalf of the Anti-Harassment Unit (AHU).  I would like to briefly speak to you to obtain the preliminary 
facts of your case.  

Can you please let me know the best available times to reach you this week, along with your phone number?   

Thanks,  

Lakeisha Jordan 
Office of Equal Rights │ FEMA  
(202) 531-2978  

For Official Use Only - Privacy Act Sensitive. This document was prepared by DHS/FEMA and is covered by 
federal and state law governing electronic communications.  It may contain confidential, pre-decisional, and/or 
sensitive Government information, and is not for release, review, retransmission, dissemination or use by anyone 
other than the intended recipient.  Please consult the original sender before disclosing any information contained 
herein.  If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

48

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
49

 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Good morning, Max,  

Jordan, Lakeisha
Wednesday, September 5, 2018 10:08 AM
Meindl, Max
RE: Request for Availability - OER AHU Intake

Thank you for your response. Are you still available to speak this morning before noon? If so, I will give you a call.  

If you are no longer available today, I will send you a calendar invite to speak tomorrow around 10:30AM.  

Thanks,  

Lakeisha Jordan 
Office of Equal Rights │ FEMA  
(202) 531-2978  

For Official Use Only - Privacy Act Sensitive. This document was prepared by DHS/FEMA and is covered by federal and 
state law governing electronic communications.  It may contain confidential, pre-decisional, and/or sensitive Government 
information, and is not for release, review, retransmission, dissemination or use by anyone other than the intended 
recipient.  Please consult the original sender before disclosing any information contained herein.  If you have received this 
in error, please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, September 4, 2018 4:34 PM 
To: Jordan, Lakeisha <lakeisha.jordan@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Request for Availability - OER AHU Intake 

Tomorrow before noon, Thursday before noon. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

50

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
From: Jordan, Lakeisha  
Sent: Tuesday, September 4, 2018 3:31 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Request for Availability - OER AHU Intake 

Good afternoon, Max,  

I am an EEO Specialist in the Office of Equal Rights and your case was recently reassigned to me to conduct an 
intake on behalf of the Anti-Harassment Unit (AHU).  I would like to briefly speak to you to obtain the preliminary 
facts of your case.  

Can you please let me know the best available times to reach you this week, along with your phone number?   

Thanks,  

Lakeisha Jordan 
Office of Equal Rights │ FEMA  
(202) 531-2978  

For Official Use Only - Privacy Act Sensitive. This document was prepared by DHS/FEMA and is covered by 
federal and state law governing electronic communications.  It may contain confidential, pre-decisional, and/or 
sensitive Government information, and is not for release, review, retransmission, dissemination or use by anyone 
other than the intended recipient.  Please consult the original sender before disclosing any information contained 
herein.  If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

51

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, September 4, 2018 3:34 PM
Jordan, Lakeisha
RE: Request for Availability - OER AHU Intake

Tomorrow before noon, Thursday before noon. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Jordan, Lakeisha  
Sent: Tuesday, September 4, 2018 3:31 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Request for Availability - OER AHU Intake 

Good afternoon, Max,  

I am an EEO Specialist in the Office of Equal Rights and your case was recently reassigned to me to conduct an 
intake on behalf of the Anti-Harassment Unit (AHU).  I would like to briefly speak to you to obtain the preliminary 
facts of your case.  

Can you please let me know the best available times to reach you this week, along with your phone number?   

Thanks,  

Lakeisha Jordan 
Office of Equal Rights │ FEMA  
(202) 531-2978  

For Official Use Only - Privacy Act Sensitive. This document was prepared by DHS/FEMA and is covered by 
federal and state law governing electronic communications.  It may contain confidential, pre-decisional, and/or 
sensitive Government information, and is not for release, review, retransmission, dissemination or use by anyone 

52

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
other than the intended recipient.  Please consult the original sender before disclosing any information contained 
herein.  If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

53

 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Good afternoon, Max,  

Jordan, Lakeisha
Tuesday, September 4, 2018 3:31 PM
Meindl, Max
Request for Availability - OER AHU Intake

I am an EEO Specialist in the Office of Equal Rights and your case was recently reassigned to me to conduct an 
intake on behalf of the Anti-Harassment Unit (AHU).  I would like to briefly speak to you to obtain the preliminary 
facts of your case.  

Can you please let me know the best available times to reach you this week, along with your phone number?   

Thanks,  

Lakeisha Jordan 
Office of Equal Rights │ FEMA  
(202) 531-2978  

For Official Use Only - Privacy Act Sensitive. This document was prepared by DHS/FEMA and is covered by 
federal and state law governing electronic communications.  It may contain confidential, pre-decisional, and/or 
sensitive Government information, and is not for release, review, retransmission, dissemination or use by anyone 
other than the intended recipient.  Please consult the original sender before disclosing any information contained 
herein.  If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

54

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, September 4, 2018 2:13 PM
Asaro, Karen
RE: mediation conference call

1.  Thursday before 1:00 PM,  
2.  Wed. next week 09:00 to 15:00,  
3.  Thursday next week 09:00 to 15:00. 

I am in the office until about noon tomorrow but not sure about availability of a tele-conference room or anything. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Asaro, Karen  
Sent: Tuesday, September 4, 2018 1:56 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: mediation conference call 

Hello Mr. Meindl, 

Thank you for speaking with me today regarding the mediation conference call.  If you can send me several dates that 
you are available for scheduling mediation,  I will coordinate with Mr. Walters’ availability and confirm the earliest date 
that works with everyone’s schedule. 

Thank you, 

Karen 

Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 
Washington, DC 20472 
Phone: 571 431-2863 

55

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic 
communication and may contain confidential and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is 
not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this 
message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and 
delete this message. Thank you. 

56

 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Hello Mr. Meindl, 

Asaro, Karen
Tuesday, September 4, 2018 1:56 PM
Meindl, Max
mediation conference call

Thank you for speaking with me today regarding the mediation conference call.  If you can send me several dates that 
you are available for scheduling mediation,  I will coordinate with Mr. Walters’ availability and confirm the earliest date 
that works with everyone’s schedule. 

Thank you, 

Karen 

Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 
Washington, DC 20472 
Phone: 571 431-2863 

This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic 
communication and may contain confidential and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is 
not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this 
message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and 
delete this message. Thank you. 

57

 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Asaro, Karen
Tuesday, September 4, 2018 9:50 AM
Meindl, Max
RE: HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint

Sounds good.  I have a staff meeting from 12-1 pm (Eastern). 

Look forward to speaking with you, 

Karen 

Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 
Washington, DC 20472 
Phone: 571 431-2863 

This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic 
communication and may contain confidential and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is 
not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this 
message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and 
delete this message. Thank you. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, September 4, 2018 10:39 AM 
To: Asaro, Karen <Karen.Asaro@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint 

Let me catch up a bit on my projects and will call early afternoon. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

58

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From: Asaro, Karen  
Sent: Monday, September 3, 2018 9:29 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint 

Hello Mr. Meindl, 

The Office of Equal Rights (OER) has referred your EEO Complaint to the Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) Division 
for meditation.  I wanted to let you know that I am the mediator assigned.  I was hoping we could talk tomorrow, 
Tuesday, September 4.  My schedule if flexible so if you want to give me a call when you have time, I can be reached at 
571 431-2863.  If you happen to get my voice mail when you call, I probably will be on another call.  Just leave a call back 
number and I will return your call as soon as I am free. 

Thank you and I look forward to talking with you, 

Karen  

Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 
Washington, DC 20472 
Phone: 571 431-2863 

This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic 
communication and may contain confidential and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is 
not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this 
message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and 
delete this message. Thank you. 

59

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, September 4, 2018 9:39 AM
Asaro, Karen
RE: HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint

Let me catch up a bit on my projects and will call early afternoon. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Asaro, Karen  
Sent: Monday, September 3, 2018 9:29 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint 

Hello Mr. Meindl, 

The Office of Equal Rights (OER) has referred your EEO Complaint to the Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) Division 
for meditation.  I wanted to let you know that I am the mediator assigned.  I was hoping we could talk tomorrow, 
Tuesday, September 4.  My schedule if flexible so if you want to give me a call when you have time, I can be reached at 
571 431-2863.  If you happen to get my voice mail when you call, I probably will be on another call.  Just leave a call back 
number and I will return your call as soon as I am free. 

Thank you and I look forward to talking with you, 

Karen  

Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 
Washington, DC 20472 
Phone: 571 431-2863 

This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic 

60

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
communication and may contain confidential and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is 
not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this 
message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and 
delete this message. Thank you. 

61

 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Hello Mr. Meindl, 

Asaro, Karen
Monday, September 3, 2018 9:29 AM
Meindl, Max
HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint

The Office of Equal Rights (OER) has referred your EEO Complaint to the Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) Division 
for meditation.  I wanted to let you know that I am the mediator assigned.  I was hoping we could talk tomorrow, 
Tuesday, September 4.  My schedule if flexible so if you want to give me a call when you have time, I can be reached at 
571 431-2863.  If you happen to get my voice mail when you call, I probably will be on another call.  Just leave a call back 
number and I will return your call as soon as I am free. 

Thank you and I look forward to talking with you, 

Karen  

Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 
Washington, DC 20472 
Phone: 571 431-2863 

This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic 
communication and may contain confidential and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is 
not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this 
message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and 
delete this message. Thank you. 

62

 
 
 
 
 
 
Swann, Mary
Tuesday, August 28, 2018 1:59 PM
Meindl, Max
RE: Request of Additional Information

Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Hello Mr. Meindl, 

Thank you for your response. 

Respectfully, 

Mary Swann, EEO Specialist 
DHS-FEMA-OER 
3900 Karina Lane, Room 242 
Denton, TX 76202 
(940) 891-8573 (Ofc) 
(540) 504-2712 (eFAX) 
mary.swann@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, August 28, 2018 1:27 PM 
To: Swann, Mary <Mary.Swann@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Request of Additional Information 

Ms. Swann, 
Per your request: 

Please provide the following requested information by close of business today.   
I am in the process of contacting the responsible management official (RMO) regarding your claims.   
In your response to remedies/resolutions, you stated indeterminate.   
I will need you to provide some type/form of resolution to provide the RMO upon my contact. 

Also, please provide  
- the name and title of Ms. Harrison’s supervisor.   
              Brian C. Slie 

Deputy Infrastructure Branch Director  
DR 4332 TX JFO Austin 
Region 6 Infrastructure Branch 
DHS/FEMA 
940.368.9270 Cell 
Brian.slie@fema.dhs.gov 

- the names and titles of the management officials in your chain of command. 
              Detra Terry, Task Force Lead 
              Detra S. Terry 

Public Assistance-PDM/DIS 
DR-4332-TX 
202.718.0109|iFEMA cell 

63

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov 

              Albert P. Walters III 

Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
Disaster 4332 – Harvey 
Cell Phone 504-570-4412 
Albert.Walters@FEMA.DHS.GOV 

- and, please spell out the acronyms you have used throughout your report. 
              DPAG                  Deputy Public Assistance Group Lead 
              TAC PDMG         Technical Assistance Contractor Program Delivery Manager 
              PAPG                   Public Assistance Policy Guide 
              JFO                       Joint Field Office 
              TFL                       Task Force Lead 

PDMG                 Program Delivery Manager 

If you have questions, feel free to contact me at (940) 891-8573. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Swann, Mary  
Sent: Tuesday, August 28, 2018 9:43 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Request of Additional Information 

Good morning Mr. Meindl, 

Hope things are going well. 

Please provide the following requested information by close of business today.  I am in the process of 
contacting the responsible management official (RMO) regarding your claims.  In your response to 
remedies/resolutions, you stated indeterminate.  I will need you to provide some type/form of resolution 
to provide the RMO upon my contact. 

Also, please provide  
- the name and title of Ms. Harrison’s supervisor.   
- the names and titles of the management officials in your chain of command. 
- and, please spell out the acronyms you have used throughout your report. 

64

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
If you have questions, feel free to contact me at (940) 891-8573. 

Thank you in advance for your response and cooperation. 

Respectfully, 

Mary Swann, EEO Specialist 
DHS-FEMA Office of Equal Rights 
3900 Karina Lane, Room 242 
Denton, TX 76202 
(940) 891-8573 (Ofc) 
(540) 504-2712 (eFAX) 
mary.swann@fema.dhs.gov 

65

 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Ms. Swann, 
Per your request: 

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, August 28, 2018 1:27 PM
Swann, Mary
RE: Request of Additional Information

Please provide the following requested information by close of business today.   
I am in the process of contacting the responsible management official (RMO) regarding your claims.   
In your response to remedies/resolutions, you stated indeterminate.   
I will need you to provide some type/form of resolution to provide the RMO upon my contact. 

Also, please provide  
- the name and title of Ms. Harrison’s supervisor.   
              Brian C. Slie 

Deputy Infrastructure Branch Director  
DR 4332 TX JFO Austin 
Region 6 Infrastructure Branch 
DHS/FEMA 
940.368.9270 Cell 
Brian.slie@fema.dhs.gov 

- the names and titles of the management officials in your chain of command. 
              Detra Terry, Task Force Lead 
              Detra S. Terry 

Public Assistance-PDM/DIS 
DR-4332-TX 
202.718.0109|iFEMA cell 
detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov 

              Albert P. Walters III 

Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
Disaster 4332 – Harvey 
Cell Phone 504-570-4412 
Albert.Walters@FEMA.DHS.GOV 

- and, please spell out the acronyms you have used throughout your report. 
              DPAG                  Deputy Public Assistance Group Lead 
              TAC PDMG         Technical Assistance Contractor Program Delivery Manager 
              PAPG                   Public Assistance Policy Guide 
              JFO                       Joint Field Office 
              TFL                       Task Force Lead 

PDMG                 Program Delivery Manager 

If you have questions, feel free to contact me at (940) 891-8573. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 

66

 
 
 
 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Swann, Mary  
Sent: Tuesday, August 28, 2018 9:43 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Request of Additional Information 

Good morning Mr. Meindl, 

Hope things are going well. 

Please provide the following requested information by close of business today.  I am in the process of 
contacting the responsible management official (RMO) regarding your claims.  In your response to 
remedies/resolutions, you stated indeterminate.  I will need you to provide some type/form of resolution 
to provide the RMO upon my contact. 

Also, please provide  
- the name and title of Ms. Harrison’s supervisor.   
- the names and titles of the management officials in your chain of command. 
- and, please spell out the acronyms you have used throughout your report. 

If you have questions, feel free to contact me at (940) 891-8573. 

Thank you in advance for your response and cooperation. 

Respectfully, 

Mary Swann, EEO Specialist 
DHS-FEMA Office of Equal Rights 
3900 Karina Lane, Room 242 
Denton, TX 76202 
(940) 891-8573 (Ofc) 
(540) 504-2712 (eFAX) 
mary.swann@fema.dhs.gov 

67

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, August 28, 2018 11:43 AM
Henri, Foudiya
Goudy, Douglas
RE: Max Meindl request for Reasonable Accommodation

Hello Max, 
What is the name of your Supervisor please?_   DETRA TERRY 
Was the RA request sent to the Supervisor?       YES 
If yes please let me know.   
Also sent to:  From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 2:11 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Oke, Nicole <nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation 
<fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas <Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya 
<Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; femamax@gmail.com 
Subject: RA 

I can assist with the RA request ONLY. 

For Informal Complaint assistance please contact Doug Goudy directly.   

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Henri, Foudiya  
Sent: Tuesday, August 28, 2018 11:28 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Goudy, Douglas <Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Max Meindl request for Reasonable Accommodation 
Importance: High 

Hello Max, 

68

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
What is the name of your Supervisor please?_____________.  Was the RA request sent to the Supervisor? If yes please 
let me know.  I can assist with the RA request ONLY. 

For Informal Complaint assistance please contact Doug Goudy directly.   

Thank you, 
Foudiya Henri 
202-394-4633 Cell 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 2:11 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Oke, Nicole <nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; FEMA-Reasonable-
Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas <Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; 
Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; femamax@gmail.com 
Subject: RA 

Detra, 
RA form attached. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

69

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Good morning Mr. Meindl, 

Hope things are going well. 

Swann, Mary
Tuesday, August 28, 2018 9:43 AM
Meindl, Max
Request of Additional Information

Please provide the following requested information by close of business today.  I am in the process of 
contacting the responsible management official (RMO) regarding your claims.  In your response to 
remedies/resolutions, you stated indeterminate.  I will need you to provide some type/form of resolution 
to provide the RMO upon my contact. 

Also, please provide  
- the name and title of Ms. Harrison’s supervisor.   
- the names and titles of the management officials in your chain of command. 
- and, please spell out the acronyms you have used throughout your report. 

If you have questions, feel free to contact me at (940) 891-8573. 

Thank you in advance for your response and cooperation. 

Respectfully, 

Mary Swann, EEO Specialist 
DHS-FEMA Office of Equal Rights 
3900 Karina Lane, Room 242 
Denton, TX 76202 
(940) 891-8573 (Ofc) 
(540) 504-2712 (eFAX) 
mary.swann@fema.dhs.gov 

70

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

femamax@gmail.com
Sunday, August 26, 2018 3:42 PM
Meindl, Max
PIP
fema255-0-1.doc.docx

71

 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Thursday, August 23, 2018 3:18 PM
Swann, Mary
RE: Potential EEO Complaint
Consent.pdf; EEO Complainants Rights  Responsibilities (002)-signed.pdf; EEO Counselor 
Checklist (002)-signed.pdf; Max Meindl-affidavit-signed.pdf

If you believe you have been discriminated against and wish to pursue the EEO process, please provide the following 
information 
1.           your name, title and contact phone number; 
a.           Max Meindl, PMP, Emergency Management Specialist (PDMG), 832-293-3671 
2.           your work address and home address (do not provide a P.O. Box number);  
a.           8223 Willowplace Blvd, Houston TX.  (work) 
b.           5 E. Austin, Bellville, TX 77418 (home) 
3.           basis(es) of the alleged discrimination; 
a.           if age is the basis, provide date of birth; 06/21/1951 
b.           if disability is the basis, provide the name of disability;  coronary Artery Disease, possible/leading to Congestive 
Heart Failure (CHF) 
c.            if retaliation is the basis, provide date of prior EEO Activity or the incident you believe to be 
discriminatory;  Believe retaliation was for my determination of applicant eligibility in contravention to prevailing 
thought.  The issue with an applicant, City of Bellaire, pursuant my determination of a policy issue in contradiction to the 
prevailing point of view and that of the TAC PDMG. The apparent consensus for the issue at hand was that the applicant 
was not eligible for a specific claimed damage. After reviewing the available information in the PAPG and information sent 
from the JFO, I concluded that the applicant could possibly be eligible and proffered the opinion that asking or advising 
them to withdraw the claim was incorrect and not supported by the information I had reviewed and that it would be a 
disservice to the applicant to have them withdraw the claim as opposed to the issuance of a Determination Memo (DM). 
With a DM, the applicant at least retains the right to appeal whereas a withdrawal would result in no right to appeal, if I 
understand the process correctly. I had previously obtained approval from the Task Lead to submit an official “Policy 
Inquiry” to the policy team to obtain further clarification and direction. We, TFL and I, discussed the issue and agreed that 
waiting for the policy clarification would be the appropriate path to take. 

4.           a brief bullet list of each incident you believe to be discriminatory to include  
a.           name(s) of the alleged discriminating party; 
                             Jade Harrison 
c.            date(s) of the incident; and  
i.            July 26th 2018 
d.           name(s) of any witness to the alleged discrimination; 
i.            T.K. Shadowens 
e.           remedies/resolution to resolve your issues.  
i.            indeterminate 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

72

 
 
  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Swann, Mary  
Sent: Monday, August 20, 2018 1:09 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: Potential EEO Complaint 

Good afternoon Mr. Meindl, 

I will need your signature on each form (except “your Right to Equal Opportunity) before proceeding 
with the EEO process.  If you have questions, please call. 

Respectfully, 

Mary Swann, EEO Specialist 
Informal Team Unit 
Office of Equal Rights 
3900 Karina Lane 
Denton, TX 76202 
(940) 891-8573 (ofc) 
(540) 504-2712 (efax) 
mary.swann@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Swann, Mary  
Sent: Thursday, August 16, 2018 11:13 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: Potential EEO Complaint 

Good Morning, 

I apologize, did not include the EEO forms.  See attachments. 

Respectfully, 

Mary Swann, EEO Specialist 
Informal Team Unit 
Office of Equal Rights 
3900 Karina Lane 
Denton, TX 76202 
(940) 891-8573 (ofc) 
(540) 504-2712 (efax) 
mary.swann@fema.dhs.gov 

73

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From: Swann, Mary  
Sent: Thursday, August 16, 2018 11:09 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Potential EEO Complaint 

Good Morning, 

My name is Mary Swann, EEO Counselor in the Office of Equal Rights (OER).  Please let me know if you 
will be available on Monday, August 20, 2018 at 11:30am CST to discuss your potential request for EEO 
Counseling.  If the time is not convenient, provide a time.  I have attached the EEO Counseling forms (ADR 
Consent, Counseling Checklist, and Complainant’s Rights and Responsibilities) for your review before the 
scheduled meeting.  I will review the forms with you and address any questions you may have during the 
meeting.  I also attached a copy of FEMA OER flyer “Your Right to Equal Opportunity” which gives a brief 
explanation of the EEO Counseling process.  I will remind you that an individual has 45 days from the 
date of the alleged discriminatory incident to request EEO counseling. 

If you believe you have been discriminated against and wish to pursue the EEO process, please provide 
the following information 

- your name, title and contact phone number; 

- your work address and home address (do not provide a P.O. Box number);  

-  basis(es) of the alleged discrimination; 
    - if age is the basis, provide date of birth; 
    - if disability is the basis, provide the name of disability; 
    - if retaliation is the basis, provide date of prior EEO Activity or the incident you believe to be 
discriminatory; 

- a brief bullet list of each incident you believe to be discriminatory to include  
  - name(s) of the alleged discriminating party; 
  - date(s) of the incident; and  
  - name(s) of any witness to the alleged discrimination; 

- remedies/resolution to resolve your issues.  

Thank you in advance for your response. 

Respectfully, 

Mary Swann, EEO Specialist 
Informal Team Unit 
Office of Equal Rights 
3900 Karina Lane 
Denton, TX 76202 
(940) 891-8573 (ofc) 
(540) 504-2712 (efax) 
mary.swann@fema.dhs.gov 

74

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Goudy, Douglas
Thursday, August 23, 2018 1:11 PM
Meindl, Max
Automatic reply: RA

I'm currently out of the office returning August 27, 2018.  If you require immediate assistance please call (202) 212-3535 and follow prompt to 
leave message for the Informal Unit. 

75

 
      
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, August 21, 2018 2:53 PM
Denton Setter, Aileen
Accepted: Conversation

76

 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, August 21, 2018 10:00 AM
Jones, Patricia
RE: Conference Call for IDP's

Trisha, 
Thank you so much for the update. 
Have a great day! 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Jones, Patricia  
Sent: Tuesday, August 21, 2018 9:49 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Conference Call for IDP's 

Mr Meindl, 

The IDP form has been uploaded into FED HR Navigator.  You will be able to go there and digitally sign your IDB, Plan and 
2nd Quarter. The 308 is an expectation plan.  These are generic forms that need to be signed.   Bill Boone will be getting 
with you in a few months and proceed with the process.    

If you need assistance please reach out to me.  

Thanks, 
Trisha 

PatriciaJones ‘ Trisha’ 
PA Operation Support Crew Leader 
DR-4332-TX 
202-706-2160 FEMA 

77

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Patricia.jones1@fema.dhs.gov 

If nothing ever changed there’d be no Butterflies… 
With honor and integrity, we will safeguard the American people, our homeland, and our values. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Friday, August 17, 2018 4:27 PM 
To: Jones, Patricia <patricia.jones1@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Re: Conference Call for IDP's 

Per ATS and DTS I was off today and missed the call.  Please advise. 

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Jones, Patricia 
Sent: Friday, August 17, 2018 9:21:18 AM 
To: Boone, William; Atchison, Randy; Bambe, Dayo; Bazemore, Ronetta; Boyko, Brent; Carnes, Lingeria; Clebourn-
McPherson, Toya; Cress, Jack; In, Anthony; Kirk, Denise; Malbrough, Alfred; Meindl, Max; Nash, Julie; Pennisi, Emma; 
Riley Jr, Bernard; Terry, Detra; Walker, Daniel; White, Richard; Wick, Timothy; Wiltse, David 
Subject: Conference Call for IDP's 
When: Friday, August 17, 2018 10:00 AM-11:00 AM. 
Where: 1-800-320-4330 PIN 654321#  

Conference Call for IDP’s  
1-800-320-4330 
PIN 654321# 

78

 
 
 
 
  
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Mr Meindl, 

Jones, Patricia
Tuesday, August 21, 2018 9:49 AM
Meindl, Max
RE: Conference Call for IDP's

The IDP form has been uploaded into FED HR Navigator.  You will be able to go there and digitally sign your IDB, Plan and 
2nd Quarter. The 308 is an expectation plan.  These are generic forms that need to be signed.   Bill Boone will be getting 
with you in a few months and proceed with the process.    

If you need assistance please reach out to me.  

Thanks, 
Trisha 

PatriciaJones ‘ Trisha’ 
PA Operation Support Crew Leader 
DR-4332-TX 
202-706-2160 FEMA 

Patricia.jones1@fema.dhs.gov 

If nothing ever changed there’d be no Butterflies… 
With honor and integrity, we will safeguard the American people, our homeland, and our values. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Friday, August 17, 2018 4:27 PM 
To: Jones, Patricia <patricia.jones1@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Re: Conference Call for IDP's 

Per ATS and DTS I was off today and missed the call.  Please advise. 

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Jones, Patricia 
Sent: Friday, August 17, 2018 9:21:18 AM 
To: Boone, William; Atchison, Randy; Bambe, Dayo; Bazemore, Ronetta; Boyko, Brent; Carnes, Lingeria; Clebourn-
McPherson, Toya; Cress, Jack; In, Anthony; Kirk, Denise; Malbrough, Alfred; Meindl, Max; Nash, Julie; Pennisi, Emma; 
Riley Jr, Bernard; Terry, Detra; Walker, Daniel; White, Richard; Wick, Timothy; Wiltse, David 
Subject: Conference Call for IDP's 
When: Friday, August 17, 2018 10:00 AM-11:00 AM. 
Where: 1-800-320-4330 PIN 654321#  

Conference Call for IDP’s  
1-800-320-4330 

79

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
PIN 654321# 

80

Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Monday, August 20, 2018 5:45 PM
femamax@gmail.com
Fwd: Potential EEO Complaint

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Meindl, Max 
Sent: Monday, August 20, 2018 1:22:42 PM 
To: Swann, Mary 
Subject: RE: Potential EEO Complaint  

Will do, in the field with an applicant for the afternoon. 
Will do soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Swann, Mary  
Sent: Monday, August 20, 2018 1:09 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: Potential EEO Complaint 

Good afternoon Mr. Meindl, 

I will need your signature on each form (except “your Right to Equal Opportunity) before proceeding 
with the EEO process.  If you have questions, please call. 

Respectfully, 

Mary Swann, EEO Specialist 
Informal Team Unit 
Office of Equal Rights 

81

 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
3900 Karina Lane 
Denton, TX 76202 
(940) 891-8573 (ofc) 
(540) 504-2712 (efax) 
mary.swann@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Swann, Mary  
Sent: Thursday, August 16, 2018 11:13 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: Potential EEO Complaint 

Good Morning, 

I apologize, did not include the EEO forms.  See attachments. 

Respectfully, 

Mary Swann, EEO Specialist 
Informal Team Unit 
Office of Equal Rights 
3900 Karina Lane 
Denton, TX 76202 
(940) 891-8573 (ofc) 
(540) 504-2712 (efax) 
mary.swann@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Swann, Mary  
Sent: Thursday, August 16, 2018 11:09 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Potential EEO Complaint 

Good Morning, 

My name is Mary Swann, EEO Counselor in the Office of Equal Rights (OER).  Please let me know if you 
will be available on Monday, August 20, 2018 at 11:30am CST to discuss your potential request for EEO 
Counseling.  If the time is not convenient, provide a time.  I have attached the EEO Counseling forms (ADR 
Consent, Counseling Checklist, and Complainant’s Rights and Responsibilities) for your review before the 
scheduled meeting.  I will review the forms with you and address any questions you may have during the 
meeting.  I also attached a copy of FEMA OER flyer “Your Right to Equal Opportunity” which gives a brief 
explanation of the EEO Counseling process.  I will remind you that an individual has 45 days from the 
date of the alleged discriminatory incident to request EEO counseling. 

If you believe you have been discriminated against and wish to pursue the EEO process, please provide 
the following information 

- your name, title and contact phone number; 

- your work address and home address (do not provide a P.O. Box number);  

-  basis(es) of the alleged discrimination; 
    - if age is the basis, provide date of birth; 

82

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    - if disability is the basis, provide the name of disability; 
    - if retaliation is the basis, provide date of prior EEO Activity or the incident you believe to be 
discriminatory; 

- a brief bullet list of each incident you believe to be discriminatory to include  
  - name(s) of the alleged discriminating party; 
  - date(s) of the incident; and  
  - name(s) of any witness to the alleged discrimination; 

- remedies/resolution to resolve your issues.  

Thank you in advance for your response. 

Respectfully, 

Mary Swann, EEO Specialist 
Informal Team Unit 
Office of Equal Rights 
3900 Karina Lane 
Denton, TX 76202 
(940) 891-8573 (ofc) 
(540) 504-2712 (efax) 
mary.swann@fema.dhs.gov 

83

  
  
  
  
  
  
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Monday, August 20, 2018 1:23 PM
Swann, Mary
RE: Potential EEO Complaint

Will do, in the field with an applicant for the afternoon. 
Will do soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Swann, Mary  
Sent: Monday, August 20, 2018 1:09 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: Potential EEO Complaint 

Good afternoon Mr. Meindl, 

I will need your signature on each form (except “your Right to Equal Opportunity) before proceeding 
with the EEO process.  If you have questions, please call. 

Respectfully, 

Mary Swann, EEO Specialist 
Informal Team Unit 
Office of Equal Rights 
3900 Karina Lane 
Denton, TX 76202 
(940) 891-8573 (ofc) 
(540) 504-2712 (efax) 
mary.swann@fema.dhs.gov 

84

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From: Swann, Mary  
Sent: Thursday, August 16, 2018 11:13 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: Potential EEO Complaint 

Good Morning, 

I apologize, did not include the EEO forms.  See attachments. 

Respectfully, 

Mary Swann, EEO Specialist 
Informal Team Unit 
Office of Equal Rights 
3900 Karina Lane 
Denton, TX 76202 
(940) 891-8573 (ofc) 
(540) 504-2712 (efax) 
mary.swann@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Swann, Mary  
Sent: Thursday, August 16, 2018 11:09 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Potential EEO Complaint 

Good Morning, 

My name is Mary Swann, EEO Counselor in the Office of Equal Rights (OER).  Please let me know if you 
will be available on Monday, August 20, 2018 at 11:30am CST to discuss your potential request for EEO 
Counseling.  If the time is not convenient, provide a time.  I have attached the EEO Counseling forms (ADR 
Consent, Counseling Checklist, and Complainant’s Rights and Responsibilities) for your review before the 
scheduled meeting.  I will review the forms with you and address any questions you may have during the 
meeting.  I also attached a copy of FEMA OER flyer “Your Right to Equal Opportunity” which gives a brief 
explanation of the EEO Counseling process.  I will remind you that an individual has 45 days from the 
date of the alleged discriminatory incident to request EEO counseling. 

If you believe you have been discriminated against and wish to pursue the EEO process, please provide 
the following information 

- your name, title and contact phone number; 

- your work address and home address (do not provide a P.O. Box number);  

-  basis(es) of the alleged discrimination; 
    - if age is the basis, provide date of birth; 
    - if disability is the basis, provide the name of disability; 
    - if retaliation is the basis, provide date of prior EEO Activity or the incident you believe to be 
discriminatory; 

- a brief bullet list of each incident you believe to be discriminatory to include  
  - name(s) of the alleged discriminating party; 

85

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  - date(s) of the incident; and  
  - name(s) of any witness to the alleged discrimination; 

- remedies/resolution to resolve your issues.  

Thank you in advance for your response. 

Respectfully, 

Mary Swann, EEO Specialist 
Informal Team Unit 
Office of Equal Rights 
3900 Karina Lane 
Denton, TX 76202 
(940) 891-8573 (ofc) 
(540) 504-2712 (efax) 
mary.swann@fema.dhs.gov 

86

 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Good afternoon Mr. Meindl, 

Swann, Mary
Monday, August 20, 2018 1:09 PM
Meindl, Max
FW: Potential EEO Complaint
Your Right to Equal Opportunity 07 - 18.pdf; ADR.pdf; EEO Counselor Checklist.pdf; EEO 
Complainants Rights  Responsibilities.pdf

I will need your signature on each form (except “your Right to Equal Opportunity) before proceeding 
with the EEO process.  If you have questions, please call. 

Respectfully, 

Mary Swann, EEO Specialist 
Informal Team Unit 
Office of Equal Rights 
3900 Karina Lane 
Denton, TX 76202 
(940) 891-8573 (ofc) 
(540) 504-2712 (efax) 
mary.swann@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Swann, Mary  
Sent: Thursday, August 16, 2018 11:13 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: Potential EEO Complaint 

Good Morning, 

I apologize, did not include the EEO forms.  See attachments. 

Respectfully, 

Mary Swann, EEO Specialist 
Informal Team Unit 
Office of Equal Rights 
3900 Karina Lane 
Denton, TX 76202 
(940) 891-8573 (ofc) 
(540) 504-2712 (efax) 
mary.swann@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Swann, Mary  
Sent: Thursday, August 16, 2018 11:09 AM 

87

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Potential EEO Complaint 

Good Morning, 

My name is Mary Swann, EEO Counselor in the Office of Equal Rights (OER).  Please let me know if you 
will be available on Monday, August 20, 2018 at 11:30am CST to discuss your potential request for EEO 
Counseling.  If the time is not convenient, provide a time.  I have attached the EEO Counseling forms (ADR 
Consent, Counseling Checklist, and Complainant’s Rights and Responsibilities) for your review before the 
scheduled meeting.  I will review the forms with you and address any questions you may have during the 
meeting.  I also attached a copy of FEMA OER flyer “Your Right to Equal Opportunity” which gives a brief 
explanation of the EEO Counseling process.  I will remind you that an individual has 45 days from the 
date of the alleged discriminatory incident to request EEO counseling. 

If you believe you have been discriminated against and wish to pursue the EEO process, please provide 
the following information 

- your name, title and contact phone number; 

- your work address and home address (do not provide a P.O. Box number);  

-  basis(es) of the alleged discrimination; 
    - if age is the basis, provide date of birth; 
    - if disability is the basis, provide the name of disability; 
    - if retaliation is the basis, provide date of prior EEO Activity or the incident you believe to be 
discriminatory; 

- a brief bullet list of each incident you believe to be discriminatory to include  
  - name(s) of the alleged discriminating party; 
  - date(s) of the incident; and  
  - name(s) of any witness to the alleged discrimination; 

- remedies/resolution to resolve your issues.  

Thank you in advance for your response. 

Respectfully, 

Mary Swann, EEO Specialist 
Informal Team Unit 
Office of Equal Rights 
3900 Karina Lane 
Denton, TX 76202 
(940) 891-8573 (ofc) 
(540) 504-2712 (efax) 
mary.swann@fema.dhs.gov 

88

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Monday, August 20, 2018 11:15 AM
Meindl, Max
sick

, close to heading to the emergency room today (Sunday), took nitro pills, condition stabilized, but concerning.  Received 
Blue Cross docs on Saturday so hope to get to a non VA doctor/cardiologist soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

89

 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Friday, August 17, 2018 4:27 PM
Jones, Patricia
Re: Conference Call for IDP's

Per ATS and DTS I was off today and missed the call.  Please advise. 

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Jones, Patricia 
Sent: Friday, August 17, 2018 9:21:18 AM 
To: Boone, William; Atchison, Randy; Bambe, Dayo; Bazemore, Ronetta; Boyko, Brent; Carnes, Lingeria; Clebourn-
McPherson, Toya; Cress, Jack; In, Anthony; Kirk, Denise; Malbrough, Alfred; Meindl, Max; Nash, Julie; Pennisi, Emma; 
Riley Jr, Bernard; Terry, Detra; Walker, Daniel; White, Richard; Wick, Timothy; Wiltse, David 
Subject: Conference Call for IDP's 
When: Friday, August 17, 2018 10:00 AM-11:00 AM. 
Where: 1-800-320-4330 PIN 654321#  

Conference Call for IDP’s  
1-800-320-4330 
PIN 654321# 

90

 
  
Meindl, Max

Subject:
Location:

Start:
End:
Show Time As:

Conference Call for IDP's
1-800-320-4330   PIN 654321#

Fri 8/17/2018 10:00 AM
Fri 8/17/2018 11:00 AM
Tentative

Recurrence:

(none)

Meeting Status:

Not yet responded

Jones, Patricia
Jones, Patricia; Boone, William; Atchison, Randy; Bambe, Dayo; Bazemore, Ronetta; 
Boyko, Brent; Carnes, Lingeria; Clebourn-McPherson, Toya; Cress, Jack; In, Anthony; Kirk, 
Denise; Malbrough, Alfred; Meindl, Max; Nash, Julie; Pennisi, Emma; Riley Jr, Bernard; 
Terry, Detra; Walker, Daniel; White, Richard; Wick, Timothy; Wiltse, David
McKnight Jr, Thomas

Organizer:
Required Attendees:

Optional Attendees:

Conference Call for IDP’s  
1-800-320-4330 
PIN 654321# 

91

Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:

Subject:
Attachments:

Henri, Foudiya
Thursday, August 16, 2018 9:51 AM
Avery, Darlene; femamax@gmail.com; Meindl, Max
Oke, Nicole; McPhie, Regina; FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation; Oke, Nicole; Goudy, 
Douglas
RE: Complaint
blank FEMA Form 256-0-1.pdf

Just tried calling Mr. Max on 832-293-3671.  You may call contact me at 202-394-4633 Cell for assistance should you 
believe you need a Reasonable Accommodation.  FEMA employees may make a request at any time. 

Attached is the FEMA FORM 256-0-1 that all employees may use to document their request.  The employee completes 
PAGE #1 and signs the bottom.  Employee provides to Supervisor.  If any documentation is provided that contains 
medical it must be password protected.  Documentation only needs to be specific to the request. Please copy FEMA 
Reasonable Accommodation Mailbox when you forward the request. 

For further assistance with a complaint I have copied  the Informal Unit Chief, Ms. Oke and Team Lead, Mr. 
Goudy.  You may contact them directly at 202-212-3535, Hit Option #6.  

Thank  you, 

Foudiya Henri 
EEO Specialist / RA Coordinator 
Office of Equal Rights 
500 C St. SW Washington DC 

: iPhone: 202.394.4633 | : Desk: 202.212.4490 | : 540.504.2068 | e-: foudiya.henri@fema.dhs.gov  |  
e-:  fema-reasonable-acommodation@fema.dhs.gov  Click to request an accommodation 

From: Avery, Darlene [mailto:darlene.avery@hq.dhs.gov]  
Sent: Thursday, August 16, 2018 8:02 AM 
To: femamax@gmail.com; Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Oke, Nicole <nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya 
<Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Complaint 

Max Meindl 

Our HQ’s EEO office has received the attached email regarding disability and alleged discrimination inquiries.  Our office 
do not process complaints or disability items for FEMA employees. 

As a FEMA employee, the process is for you to reach out to the FEMA’s Office of Equal Rights (OER). I am forwarding 
your email to the Reasonable Accommodations Program Manager, Foudiya Henri and the Information Complaints 
Manager/staff, Nicole Oke, Regina McPhie to learn how best they can assist you in processing your requests.  

92

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I encourage you to reach out to them if you have further questions or would like to begin the Informal complaints 
process. 

Regards, 

Darlene Avery, MBA 
Program Manager, Disability/Reasonable Accommodation 
Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov 
202-357-1204 (office) 
202-357-1188 (fax) 

From: femamax@gmail.com <femamax@gmail.com>  
Sent: Wednesday, August 15, 2018 4:27 PM 
To: Avery, Darlene <darlene.avery@hq.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: Complaint 

I am, after a couple of weeks of considerable handwringing and possible/potential blowback considerations, hereby 
submitting the attached complaint, although I am very concerned about retaliation. 
I have been falsely accused, in my opinion, and it appears the parties involved are escalating the issue to the possible 
detriment of my employment. 
I categorically deny the allegations and assertions as put forth. 
I have had a very successful tenure with FEMA since 09/2017 when deployed to the Beaumont East team. 
I was a high producer of “applicant signed projects” and continue to do the same here as demonstrated in the Grants 
Manager Metrics. 
I never had any problem with “communications” until all of the sudden I can’t seem to do anything correct in my current 
deployment here in Houston. 
I am dismayed with the process and attitude of the parties, the guilty until proven innocent prevailing mindset is 
inherently unfair. 
A sit-with summary by TK Shadowens before my meeting with the DPAG could best described as “Fiction” because we 
never discussed the items in his summary report and I advised he and DPAG of the same. 
Show me a specific example of the alleged “communication” or “body language” issue.   
I have been falsely accused and convicted without any consideration for my perspective or statements to clarify. 
I am submitting this to you as HR in confidence and would like to request a contact to the EEO group so I can file with 
them also because I feel this issue revolves around my disability and needs to be addressed. 
I would also request a contact to ADR so I can pursue that avenue as well. 
Please contact me with any questions, guidance, advice if required. 
Please advise soonest. 

Thank you in advance. 
Max Meindl 
832-293-3671 

FEMA PDMG 
Houston PA 
202-374-9426 

93

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:
Attachments:

Max Meindl 

Avery, Darlene <darlene.avery@hq.dhs.gov>
Thursday, August 16, 2018 7:02 AM
femamax@gmail.com; Meindl, Max
Oke, Nicole; McPhie, Regina; Henri, Foudiya
RE: Complaint
FW: Complaint

Our HQ’s EEO office has received the attached email regarding disability and alleged discrimination inquiries.  Our office 
do not process complaints or disability items for FEMA employees. 

As a FEMA employee, the process is for you to reach out to the FEMA’s Office of Equal Rights (OER). I am forwarding 
your email to the Reasonable Accommodations Program Manager, Foudiya Henri and the Information Complaints 
Manager/staff, Nicole Oke, Regina McPhie to learn how best they can assist you in processing your requests.  

I encourage you to reach out to them if you have further questions or would like to begin the Informal complaints 
process. 

Regards, 

Darlene Avery, MBA 
Program Manager, Disability/Reasonable Accommodation 
Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov 
202-357-1204 (office) 
202-357-1188 (fax) 

From: femamax@gmail.com <femamax@gmail.com>  
Sent: Wednesday, August 15, 2018 4:27 PM 
To: Avery, Darlene <darlene.avery@hq.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: Complaint 

I am, after a couple of weeks of considerable handwringing and possible/potential blowback considerations, hereby 
submitting the attached complaint, although I am very concerned about retaliation. 
I have been falsely accused, in my opinion, and it appears the parties involved are escalating the issue to the possible 
detriment of my employment. 
I categorically deny the allegations and assertions as put forth. 
I have had a very successful tenure with FEMA since 09/2017 when deployed to the Beaumont East team. 
I was a high producer of “applicant signed projects” and continue to do the same here as demonstrated in the Grants 
Manager Metrics. 
I never had any problem with “communications” until all of the sudden I can’t seem to do anything correct in my current 
deployment here in Houston. 
I am dismayed with the process and attitude of the parties, the guilty until proven innocent prevailing mindset is 
inherently unfair. 
A sit-with summary by TK Shadowens before my meeting with the DPAG could best described as “Fiction” because we 
never discussed the items in his summary report and I advised he and DPAG of the same. 
Show me a specific example of the alleged “communication” or “body language” issue.   
I have been falsely accused and convicted without any consideration for my perspective or statements to clarify. 

94

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I am submitting this to you as HR in confidence and would like to request a contact to the EEO group so I can file with 
them also because I feel this issue revolves around my disability and needs to be addressed. 
I would also request a contact to ADR so I can pursue that avenue as well. 
Please contact me with any questions, guidance, advice if required. 
Please advise soonest. 

Thank you in advance. 
Max Meindl 
832-293-3671 

FEMA PDMG 
Houston PA 
202-374-9426 

95

 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Going to VA clinic  

Get Outlook for iOS 

Meindl, Max
Thursday, August 16, 2018 7:06 AM
Terry, Detra
Sick day 

96

 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Get Outlook for iOS 

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, August 15, 2018 4:49 PM
femamax@gmail.com
Fwd: Sit With 7/27/2018 with PDM Max Meindl

From: Harrison, Jade 
Sent: Friday, August 3, 2018 2:12:55 PM 
To: Meindl, Max; Shadowens, Timothy 
Subject: Re: Sit With 7/27/2018 with PDM Max Meindl  

Max, 

This is a recap of the sit-with you had with Kirk this week. All of which led up to the sit-with.  

Jade Harrison 
Deputy Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
DR-4333 Harvey 
504-908-5357 
Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov 

From: "Meindl, Max" <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Date: Friday, August 3, 2018 at 9:11:46 AM 
To: "Shadowens, Timothy" <timothy.k.shadowens@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: "Harrison, Jade" <Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Sit With 7/27/2018 with PDM Max Meindl 

I respectfully disagree with elements of this summary. 
It is inaccurate and states as fact, elements not in evidence. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 

97

 
  
 
 
 
 
  
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Shadowens, Timothy  
Sent: Thursday, August 2, 2018 7:10 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Harrison, Jade <Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Sit With 7/27/2018 with PDM Max Meindl 

Sit With 7/27/2018 with PDM Max Meindl: Regarding City of Bellaire project #26570 the Evergreen Traffic Signal 
Cabinets & Controls PDM Mr. Meindl was asked by leadership not to send this project back to the CRC. As this project 
once was sent to the CRC, and the CRC sent it back to the field office for a review of eligibility. This project is in question 
of does the possible reimbursement fall under FHWA or FEMA. This was a transition of projects from TFL Berti and PDM 
Plunkett. The expectation was for Mr. Meindl to work and to collaborate with his teammates during this transition 
period.  

Mr. Meindl researched the eligibility reviewing the PAPPG, FHWA (TFL Berti and PDM Plunkett provided this as well), 
and involved the State counterparts. Mr. Meindl felt after his research that the project was eligible and advanced it back 
to the CRC. The CRC immediately called back to the field office confused why this project was sent back to them.  

Current Status: This project was sent to the LRO for a policy determination/policy inquiry. I did call CRC TFL Andrew 
Makardetsh at the CRC since the project is still active in the CRC. Mr. Makardetsh stated that this project as came back 
and forth from the field office. Mr. Makardetsh stated they (CRC) have forwarded this to the TRO for a Determination 
Memo submission. I stated to Mr. Makardetsh that I felt it is best to keep the current status this way, but I will notify my 
DPAG for her final decision.  

o   In addition, I also attended in person the Weekly Meeting with the PDM and the Applicant. The Applicant 
stated they would appreciate it if we obtain an official review from the FEMA policy team and draft a 
determination memo.  

TFL Kirk Shadowens Sit With - Actions to Mr. Meindl: 

       The expectation was for Mr. Meindl was to follow instructions and guidance from all leadership. TFL and other 
leaders expressed to Mr. Meindl several times the situation of the projects and what next steps to take. Mr. 
Meindl did not execute to this, as Mr. Meindl chose to do what he felt the next process step was to do. As Mr. 
Meindl should have not advanced this project to the CRC, until his TFL granted him permission. The expectation 
moving forward is for Mr. Meindl to notify and involve is TFL or leadership before advancing projects to the CRC. 
       The expectation was for Mr. Meindl to work and to collaborate with his teammates during this transition period. 
Mr. Meindl was communicated from TFL Berti and I that he was expected to work in a team effort with the PDM 
Plunkett. The team effort was requested to Mr. Meindl so that he could gain full status of the transition projects. 
Mr. Meindl during this timeframe displayed poor interaction with staff, communication with staff, and displayed 
poor interaction with his peers and leaders. The expectation moving forward is for Mr. Meindl to work with all 
teammates and leadership. Mr. Meindl needs to involve all teammates when asked, and allow those teammates 
to help assist him with their updated project status, so that the execution of project completion is established by 
an efficient manner.  

Regards,  

Kirk Shadowens 
FEMA Task Force Leader  
Harris County Branch DR-4332-TX 
Timothy.K.Shadowens@FEMA.DHS.Gov 
202-802-3384 mobile 

98

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
99

  
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, August 15, 2018 3:01 PM
femamax@gmail.com
Fwd: Not On My Watch (Part 2): Employee Resources
FactSheet_Harassment_ Employees.pdf; FactSheet_Harassment_ Supervisors and 
Managers.pdf

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Meindl, Max 
Sent: Thursday, August 2, 2018 1:11:23 PM 
To: femamax@gmail.com 
Subject: Fwd: Not On My Watch (Part 2): Employee Resources  

From: "Office of the Administrator" <officeoftheadministrator@fema.dhs.gov> 
Date: Wednesday, August 1, 2018 at 2:55:08 PM 
To: "FEMA-ALL" <FEMA-ALL@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Not On My Watch (Part 2): Employee Resources 

FEMA Team, 

I would like to reiterate that ensuring FEMA maintains a safe work environment is extremely important to me 
and to my leadership team. As stated in my previous message, you should know that FEMA has a zero-
tolerance policy for all types of harassment. If you feel you have been harassed or if you witness inappropriate 
behavior by anyone against a fellow employee, I am asking you to report it. I am attaching two documents that 
provide information on where you can do so. 

I recognize that you may find it difficult to make allegations about discrimination or harassment of any type. 
You may feel concerned that you are at risk and worry about how filing a complaint may impact your career. I 
want to assure you that any employee can file a complaint without fear of reprisal because I have a zero-
tolerance policy against retaliation. 

Sexual harassment isn’t limited to just making inappropriate advances. It also includes any unwelcome verbal or 
physical behavior that creates a hostile work environment whether it occurs inside or outside the workplace or 
through social media platforms. No one should be subjected to any such behavior by anyone you may come into 
contact with as part of your job, including managers, co-workers, contractors or Agency partners.  

When allegations of this type are brought to the Agency’s attention, I can assure you that they will be 
investigated promptly, and upon conclusion, appropriate action will be taken. As mentioned in Monday’s 
message, my leadership team is establishing an Office of Professional Responsibility to ensure expeditious, fair, 
and objective follow-up and resolution of allegations of misconduct.   

100

 
  
 
 
The attached documents will answer questions about the steps to report harassment claims.  There is also useful 
information on reporting an incident to the Anti-Harassment Unit.  Counseling services and health and wellness 
advisors are available to all FEMA employees who may not have received the support they needed in the past. 

As I’ve said before, everyone in this Agency is responsible for creating a culture of trust, mutual respect, and 
dignity in our treatment of employees and for all of those we serve. I will accept nothing less.   

It’s important to note that the few individuals participating in this behavior by no means define the majority of 
the honorable, well-intentioned, and well-qualified employees who give this Agency their best every day. I want 
you to know I appreciate your efforts and I will always support and defend you. 

101

  
  
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Thank you, Jade. 

Slie, Brian
Wednesday, August 15, 2018 2:35 PM
Harrison, Jade; Meindl, Max; Terry, Detra
RE: M. Meindl Sit-with

Brian C. Slie 
Deputy Infrastructure Branch Director  
DR 4332 TX JFO Austin 
Region 6 Infrastructure Branch 
DHS/FEMA 
940.368.9270 Cell 
Brian.slie@fema.dhs.gov 

-----Original Appointment----- 
From: Harrison, Jade  
Sent: Wednesday, August 15, 2018 2:19 PM 
To: Meindl, Max; Terry, Detra; Slie, Brian 
Subject: Canceled: M. Meindl Sit-with 
When: Wednesday, August 15, 2018 2:00 PM-2:30 PM (UTC-06:00) Central Time (US & Canada). 
Where: Houston office- Rm 225, conference call number provided 
Importance: High 

Brian, 

You can use the below number to conference in tomorrow. 

Conference Call number: 
1-800-320-4330 

PIN: 892515 

102

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, August 15, 2018 2:30 PM
femamax@gmail.com
Fwd: Branch II 205a and 207 8-13-18
FEMA-4332-DR-TX Branch II 205A 08-13-2018.pdf; FEMA-4332-DR-TX- Branch II 207 
08132018.pdf

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Jiles, Adeaner 
Sent: Tuesday, August 14, 2018 8:06:08 AM 
To: FEMA-4332-DR-TX-Branch-II-All-Hands 
Subject: Branch II 205a and 207 8-13-18  

Good morning all, 

See attached for final 205a and 207 for Branch II as of 8-13-18. 

Best, 
Liam R Bassford 
Planning Specialist (PLSP) 
Branch II Office 
Texas Hurricane Harvey 
FEMA-4332-DR-TX 
(202) 465-0432 
liam.bassford.2@fema.dhs.gov 
Click here to enter the Virtual Situation Room 

To be removed from this all-hands list, please press Ctrl and click here. 

103

 
  
  
  
  
  
Meindl, Max

Subject:
Location:

Start:
End:
Show Time As:

Canceled: M. Meindl Sit-with
Houston office- Rm 225, conference call number provided

Wed 8/15/2018 2:00 PM
Wed 8/15/2018 2:30 PM
Free

Recurrence:

(none)

Meeting Status:

Not yet responded

Organizer:
Required Attendees:

Harrison, Jade
Meindl, Max; Terry, Detra; Slie, Brian

Importance:

High

Brian, 

You can use the below number to conference in tomorrow. 

Conference Call number: 
1-800-320-4330 

PIN: 892515 

104

 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, August 15, 2018 1:58 PM
femamax@gmail.com
Fwd: IDPs
FEMA Form 255-0-1 IDP.PDF

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Jones, Patricia 
Sent: Wednesday, August 15, 2018 12:16:45 PM 
To: Meindl, Max 
Subject: IDPs  

Good Afternoon Max, 

I will be having a call on Thursday or Friday to discuss performance plans and IDPs (Individual Development Plan).  I have 
attached an example IDP for your use.  You will need to complete the IDP and return to me ASAP but no later than noon 
tomorrow 8/16.   You will need to sign and date the form as well. 

A meeting invite with conference pin will be sent out via email. 

Regards, 
Trisha 

PatriciaJones ‘ Trisha’ 
PA Operation Support Crew Leader 
DR-4332-TX 
202-706-2160 FEMA 

Patricia.jones1@fema.dhs.gov 

If nothing ever changed there’d be no Butterflies… 
With honor and integrity, we will safeguard the American people, our homeland, and our values. 

105

 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:

Subject:

Good Afternoon, 

Jones, Patricia
Wednesday, August 15, 2018 1:40 PM
Atchison, Randy; Bambe, Dayo; Bazemore, Ronetta; Boyko, Brent; Carnes, Lingeria; 
Clebourn-McPherson, Toya; Cress, Jack; In, Anthony; Kirk, Denise; Malbrough, Alfred; 
Meindl, Max; Nash, Julie; Pennisi, Emma; Riley Jr, Bernard; Terry, Detra; Teston, Sheree; 
Walker, Daniel; White, Richard; Wick, Timothy; Wiltse, David
IDPs

To answer some of the questions about the Form sent out, Bill wants you to fill out the top information and then list one 
or more training sessions you may be interested in.  
Do not worry about the cost, etc.   

Scan and email them back to me please.  

Many Thanks, 
Trisha  

PatriciaJones ‘ Trisha’ 
PA Operation Support Crew Leader 
DR-4332-TX 
202-706-2160 FEMA 

Patricia.jones1@fema.dhs.gov 

If nothing ever changed there’d be no Butterflies… 
With honor and integrity, we will safeguard the American people, our homeland, and our values. 

106

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Good Afternoon Max, 

Jones, Patricia
Wednesday, August 15, 2018 12:17 PM
Meindl, Max
IDPs
FEMA Form 255-0-1 IDP.PDF

I will be having a call on Thursday or Friday to discuss performance plans and IDPs (Individual Development Plan).  I have 
attached an example IDP for your use.  You will need to complete the IDP and return to me ASAP but no later than noon 
tomorrow 8/16.   You will need to sign and date the form as well. 

A meeting invite with conference pin will be sent out via email. 

Regards, 
Trisha 

PatriciaJones ‘ Trisha’ 
PA Operation Support Crew Leader 
DR-4332-TX 
202-706-2160 FEMA 

Patricia.jones1@fema.dhs.gov 

If nothing ever changed there’d be no Butterflies… 
With honor and integrity, we will safeguard the American people, our homeland, and our values. 

107

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Hi Brian, 

Harrison, Jade
Wednesday, August 15, 2018 11:20 AM
Terry, Detra; Slie, Brian; Meindl, Max
Boone, William
RE: M. Meindl Sit-with

Should I move forward and reschedule the sit-with for tomorrow? and if so, please advise when you are 
available. 

Jade Harrison 
Deputy Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
FEMA- Public Assistance 
DR-4332-TX  
Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov 
(504) 908-5357 (Mobile) 

_____________________________________________ 
From: Terry, Detra  
Sent: Wednesday, August 15, 2018 9:30 AM 
To: Slie, Brian <Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov>; Harrison, Jade <Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov>; Meindl, Max 
<max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Boone, William <William.Boone@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: M. Meindl Sit-with 

Yes, he informed me this morning. 

Thanks, 
Detra 
202.718.0109|iFEMA cell 
detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov 

_____________________________________________ 
From: Slie, Brian  
Sent: Wednesday, August 15, 2018 9:28 AM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov>; Harrison, Jade <Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov>; Meindl, Max 
<max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Boone, William <William.Boone@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: M. Meindl Sit-with 

Good Morning Detra, 

108

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Thank you for the visibility.  Did Mr. Meindl request a sick day after he was informed that there would be a sit-with today? 

Thank you, 

Brian 

Brian C. Slie 
Deputy Infrastructure Branch Director  
DR 4332 TX JFO Austin 
Region 6 Infrastructure Branch 
DHS/FEMA 
940.368.9270 Cell 
Brian.slie@fema.dhs.gov 

_____________________________________________ 
From: Terry, Detra  
Sent: Wednesday, August 15, 2018 8:35 AM 
To: Harrison, Jade <Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov>; Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: M. Meindl Sit-with 

Good Morning, 

Mr. Meindl will not be able attend today’s sit-with as he has taken a sick day (8/15/2018).  Meeting will be rescheduled 
at a later date. 

Thanks, 
Detra 
202.718.0109|iFEMA cell 
detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov 

-----Original Appointment----- 
From: Harrison, Jade  
Sent: Tuesday, August 14, 2018 6:38 PM 
To: Meindl, Max; Terry, Detra; Slie, Brian 
Subject: M. Meindl Sit-with 
When: Wednesday, August 15, 2018 2:00 PM-2:30 PM (UTC-06:00) Central Time (US & Canada). 
Where: Houston office- Rm 225, conference call number provided 

Brian, 

You can use the below number to conference in tomorrow. 

Conference Call number: 
1-800-320-4330 

PIN: 892515 

109

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Terry, Detra
Wednesday, August 15, 2018 9:30 AM
Slie, Brian; Harrison, Jade; Meindl, Max
Boone, William
RE: M. Meindl Sit-with

Yes, he informed me this morning. 

Thanks, 
Detra 
202.718.0109|iFEMA cell 
detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov 

_____________________________________________ 
From: Slie, Brian  
Sent: Wednesday, August 15, 2018 9:28 AM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov>; Harrison, Jade <Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov>; Meindl, Max 
<max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Boone, William <William.Boone@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: M. Meindl Sit-with 

Good Morning Detra, 

Thank you for the visibility.  Did Mr. Meindl request a sick day after he was informed that there would be a sit-with today? 

Thank you, 

Brian 

Brian C. Slie 
Deputy Infrastructure Branch Director  
DR 4332 TX JFO Austin 
Region 6 Infrastructure Branch 
DHS/FEMA 
940.368.9270 Cell 
Brian.slie@fema.dhs.gov 

_____________________________________________ 
From: Terry, Detra  
Sent: Wednesday, August 15, 2018 8:35 AM 
To: Harrison, Jade <Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov>; Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: M. Meindl Sit-with 

110

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Good Morning, 

Mr. Meindl will not be able attend today’s sit-with as he has taken a sick day (8/15/2018).  Meeting will be rescheduled 
at a later date. 

Thanks, 
Detra 
202.718.0109|iFEMA cell 
detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov 

-----Original Appointment----- 
From: Harrison, Jade  
Sent: Tuesday, August 14, 2018 6:38 PM 
To: Meindl, Max; Terry, Detra; Slie, Brian 
Subject: M. Meindl Sit-with 
When: Wednesday, August 15, 2018 2:00 PM-2:30 PM (UTC-06:00) Central Time (US & Canada). 
Where: Houston office- Rm 225, conference call number provided 

Brian, 

You can use the below number to conference in tomorrow. 

Conference Call number: 
1-800-320-4330 

PIN: 892515 

111

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Good Morning Detra, 

Slie, Brian
Wednesday, August 15, 2018 9:28 AM
Terry, Detra; Harrison, Jade; Meindl, Max
Boone, William
RE: M. Meindl Sit-with

Thank you for the visibility.  Did Mr. Meindl request a sick day after he was informed that there would be a sit-with today? 

Thank you, 

Brian 

Brian C. Slie 
Deputy Infrastructure Branch Director  
DR 4332 TX JFO Austin 
Region 6 Infrastructure Branch 
DHS/FEMA 
940.368.9270 Cell 
Brian.slie@fema.dhs.gov 

_____________________________________________ 
From: Terry, Detra  
Sent: Wednesday, August 15, 2018 8:35 AM 
To: Harrison, Jade <Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov>; Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: M. Meindl Sit-with 

Good Morning, 

Mr. Meindl will not be able attend today’s sit-with as he has taken a sick day (8/15/2018).  Meeting will be rescheduled 
at a later date. 

Thanks, 
Detra 
202.718.0109|iFEMA cell 
detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov 

-----Original Appointment----- 
From: Harrison, Jade  
Sent: Tuesday, August 14, 2018 6:38 PM 
To: Meindl, Max; Terry, Detra; Slie, Brian 
Subject: M. Meindl Sit-with 

112

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
When: Wednesday, August 15, 2018 2:00 PM-2:30 PM (UTC-06:00) Central Time (US & Canada). 
Where: Houston office- Rm 225, conference call number provided 

Brian, 

You can use the below number to conference in tomorrow. 

Conference Call number: 
1-800-320-4330 

PIN: 892515 

113

 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Good Morning, 

Terry, Detra
Wednesday, August 15, 2018 8:35 AM
Harrison, Jade; Meindl, Max; Slie, Brian
RE: M. Meindl Sit-with

Mr. Meindl will not be able attend today’s sit-with as he has taken a sick day (8/15/2018).  Meeting will be rescheduled 
at a later date. 

Thanks, 
Detra 
202.718.0109|iFEMA cell 
detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov 

-----Original Appointment----- 
From: Harrison, Jade  
Sent: Tuesday, August 14, 2018 6:38 PM 
To: Meindl, Max; Terry, Detra; Slie, Brian 
Subject: M. Meindl Sit-with 
When: Wednesday, August 15, 2018 2:00 PM-2:30 PM (UTC-06:00) Central Time (US & Canada). 
Where: Houston office- Rm 225, conference call number provided 

Brian, 

You can use the below number to conference in tomorrow. 

Conference Call number: 
1-800-320-4330 

PIN: 892515 

114

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Not well, sick day  

Get Outlook for iOS 

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, August 15, 2018 7:57 AM
Terry, Detra
Sick day

115

 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Sounds great  

Get Outlook for iOS 

Meindl, Max
Thursday, August 9, 2018 7:31 AM
Harrison, Jade
Re: Freeway Manor Baptist Church

From: Harrison, Jade 
Sent: Wednesday, August 8, 2018 6:34:25 PM 
To: Meindl, Max 
Subject: RE: Freeway Manor Baptist Church  

Max, 

Thank you for the offer. I’ll be catching up on some stuff before I leave next week. However, maybe next week 
we can get together for a group lunch. Thank so much! 

Jade Harrison 
Deputy Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
FEMA- Public Assistance 
DR-4332-TX  
Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov 
(504) 908-5357 (Mobile) 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, August 8, 2018 5:56 PM 
To: Harrison, Jade <Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Re: Freeway Manor Baptist Church 

Jade, if you’re available tomorrow for lunch I’d like to treat you to lunch before you demob. Marcus, Mary 
Margaret and possibly Detra are going to Churascos for lunch. Just over 249, South American cuisine, my way 
of saying thanks. 

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Meindl, Max 
Sent: Wednesday, August 8, 2018 5:25:43 PM 
To: Harrison, Jade 
Subject: Re: Freeway Manor Baptist Church  

I can’t seem to withdraw because it’s “pending late damage submission review “. Can you send it back 
somehow? 

Get Outlook for iOS 

116

 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
From: Harrison, Jade 
Sent: Wednesday, August 8, 2018 2:35:51 PM 
To: Meindl, Max 
Subject: RE: Freeway Manor Baptist Church  

Ok. Please remove the late submission in the Grants Manger today. 

Jade Harrison 
Deputy Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
FEMA- Public Assistance 
DR-4332-TX  
Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov 
(504) 908-5357 (Mobile) 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, August 8, 2018 2:15 PM 
To: Harrison, Jade <Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Re: Freeway Manor Baptist Church 

JH, applicant just clarified that the building I identified as the classrooms on google earth I sent to you is what 
they call the warehouse so no need for adding new DI, appreciate your assistance and attentiveness.  The 
existing DI should capture everything. 

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Meindl, Max 
Sent: Wednesday, August 8, 2018 2:07:23 PM 
To: Harrison, Jade 
Subject: Re: Freeway Manor Baptist Church  

I’m not sure how it was missed but I’ll find out 

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Harrison, Jade 
Sent: Wednesday, August 8, 2018 1:51:49 PM 
To: Meindl, Max 
Subject: RE: Freeway Manor Baptist Church  

Max, 

What is the Applicant’s reason for not submitting the building within the 60 day DI deadline? 

Jade Harrison 
Deputy Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
FEMA- Public Assistance 
DR-4332-TX  
Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov 
(504) 908-5357 (Mobile) 

117

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, August 8, 2018 8:54 AM 
To: Harrison, Jade <Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Freeway Manor Baptist Church 

FYI 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Harrison, Jade  
Sent: Tuesday, August 7, 2018 6:27 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Freeway Manor Baptist Church 

Max, 

I reviewed the late submission for the Applicant and it’s for the School, Classroom building/wing which is 
located at the address 2300 Rodney. This address is the same location as the two other line items submitted 
118

  
 
  
  
  
  
  
under this Applicant. Instead of creating a new line item, I think its best to expand the damage line items 
currently under the profile. 

In addition, you may also consider expanding the one damage line item to consolidate the damages for both of 
the current line for the church and warehouse.  

Please review. We can discuss further on tomorrow.  

Jade Harrison 
Deputy Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
FEMA- Public Assistance 
DR-4332-TX  
Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov 
(504) 908-5357 (Mobile) 

119

  
  
  
  
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, August 8, 2018 5:56 PM
Harrison, Jade
Re: Freeway Manor Baptist Church

Jade, if you’re available tomorrow for lunch I’d like to treat you to lunch before you demob. Marcus, Mary Margaret and 
possibly Detra are going to Churascos for lunch. Just over 249, South American cuisine, my way of saying thanks. 

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Meindl, Max 
Sent: Wednesday, August 8, 2018 5:25:43 PM 
To: Harrison, Jade 
Subject: Re: Freeway Manor Baptist Church  

I can’t seem to withdraw because it’s “pending late damage submission review “. Can you send it back somehow? 

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Harrison, Jade 
Sent: Wednesday, August 8, 2018 2:35:51 PM 
To: Meindl, Max 
Subject: RE: Freeway Manor Baptist Church  

Ok. Please remove the late submission in the Grants Manger today. 

Jade Harrison 
Deputy Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
FEMA- Public Assistance 
DR-4332-TX  
Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov 
(504) 908-5357 (Mobile) 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, August 8, 2018 2:15 PM 
To: Harrison, Jade <Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Re: Freeway Manor Baptist Church 

JH, applicant just clarified that the building I identified as the classrooms on google earth I sent to you is what 
they call the warehouse so no need for adding new DI, appreciate your assistance and attentiveness.  The 
existing DI should capture everything. 

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Meindl, Max 
Sent: Wednesday, August 8, 2018 2:07:23 PM 

120

 
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
To: Harrison, Jade 
Subject: Re: Freeway Manor Baptist Church  

I’m not sure how it was missed but I’ll find out 

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Harrison, Jade 
Sent: Wednesday, August 8, 2018 1:51:49 PM 
To: Meindl, Max 
Subject: RE: Freeway Manor Baptist Church  

Max, 

What is the Applicant’s reason for not submitting the building within the 60 day DI deadline? 

Jade Harrison 
Deputy Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
FEMA- Public Assistance 
DR-4332-TX  
Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov 
(504) 908-5357 (Mobile) 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, August 8, 2018 8:54 AM 
To: Harrison, Jade <Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Freeway Manor Baptist Church 

FYI 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 

121

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Harrison, Jade  
Sent: Tuesday, August 7, 2018 6:27 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Freeway Manor Baptist Church 

Max, 

I reviewed the late submission for the Applicant and it’s for the School, Classroom building/wing which is 
located at the address 2300 Rodney. This address is the same location as the two other line items submitted 
under this Applicant. Instead of creating a new line item, I think its best to expand the damage line items 
currently under the profile. 

In addition, you may also consider expanding the one damage line item to consolidate the damages for both of 
the current line for the church and warehouse.  

Please review. We can discuss further on tomorrow.  

Jade Harrison 
Deputy Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
FEMA- Public Assistance 
DR-4332-TX  
Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov 
(504) 908-5357 (Mobile) 

122

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, August 8, 2018 5:26 PM
Harrison, Jade
Re: Freeway Manor Baptist Church

I can’t seem to withdraw because it’s “pending late damage submission review “. Can you send it back somehow? 

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Harrison, Jade 
Sent: Wednesday, August 8, 2018 2:35:51 PM 
To: Meindl, Max 
Subject: RE: Freeway Manor Baptist Church  

Ok. Please remove the late submission in the Grants Manger today. 

Jade Harrison 
Deputy Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
FEMA- Public Assistance 
DR-4332-TX  
Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov 
(504) 908-5357 (Mobile) 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, August 8, 2018 2:15 PM 
To: Harrison, Jade <Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Re: Freeway Manor Baptist Church 

JH, applicant just clarified that the building I identified as the classrooms on google earth I sent to you is what 
they call the warehouse so no need for adding new DI, appreciate your assistance and attentiveness.  The 
existing DI should capture everything. 

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Meindl, Max 
Sent: Wednesday, August 8, 2018 2:07:23 PM 
To: Harrison, Jade 
Subject: Re: Freeway Manor Baptist Church  

I’m not sure how it was missed but I’ll find out 

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Harrison, Jade 
Sent: Wednesday, August 8, 2018 1:51:49 PM 
To: Meindl, Max 
Subject: RE: Freeway Manor Baptist Church  

123

 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Max, 

What is the Applicant’s reason for not submitting the building within the 60 day DI deadline? 

Jade Harrison 
Deputy Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
FEMA- Public Assistance 
DR-4332-TX  
Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov 
(504) 908-5357 (Mobile) 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, August 8, 2018 8:54 AM 
To: Harrison, Jade <Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Freeway Manor Baptist Church 

FYI 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 

124

  
  
  
  
  
 
  
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Harrison, Jade  
Sent: Tuesday, August 7, 2018 6:27 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Freeway Manor Baptist Church 

Max, 

I reviewed the late submission for the Applicant and it’s for the School, Classroom building/wing which is 
located at the address 2300 Rodney. This address is the same location as the two other line items submitted 
under this Applicant. Instead of creating a new line item, I think its best to expand the damage line items 
currently under the profile. 

In addition, you may also consider expanding the one damage line item to consolidate the damages for both of 
the current line for the church and warehouse.  

Please review. We can discuss further on tomorrow.  

Jade Harrison 
Deputy Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
FEMA- Public Assistance 
DR-4332-TX  
Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov 
(504) 908-5357 (Mobile) 

125

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, August 8, 2018 2:07 PM
Harrison, Jade
Re: Freeway Manor Baptist Church

I’m not sure how it was missed but I’ll find out 

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Harrison, Jade 
Sent: Wednesday, August 8, 2018 1:51:49 PM 
To: Meindl, Max 
Subject: RE: Freeway Manor Baptist Church  

Max, 

What is the Applicant’s reason for not submitting the building within the 60 day DI deadline? 

Jade Harrison 
Deputy Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
FEMA- Public Assistance 
DR-4332-TX  
Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov 
(504) 908-5357 (Mobile) 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, August 8, 2018 8:54 AM 
To: Harrison, Jade <Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Freeway Manor Baptist Church 

FYI 

126

 
  
  
  
  
  
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Harrison, Jade  
Sent: Tuesday, August 7, 2018 6:27 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Freeway Manor Baptist Church 

Max, 

I reviewed the late submission for the Applicant and it’s for the School, Classroom building/wing which is 
located at the address 2300 Rodney. This address is the same location as the two other line items submitted 
under this Applicant. Instead of creating a new line item, I think its best to expand the damage line items 
currently under the profile. 

In addition, you may also consider expanding the one damage line item to consolidate the damages for both of 
the current line for the church and warehouse.  

127

 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Please review. We can discuss further on tomorrow.  

Jade Harrison 
Deputy Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
FEMA- Public Assistance 
DR-4332-TX  
Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov 
(504) 908-5357 (Mobile) 

128

  
  
  
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Thursday, August 2, 2018 1:11 PM
femamax@gmail.com
Fwd: Not On My Watch (Part 2): Employee Resources
FactSheet_Harassment_ Employees.pdf; FactSheet_Harassment_ Supervisors and 
Managers.pdf

From: "Office of the Administrator" <officeoftheadministrator@fema.dhs.gov> 
Date: Wednesday, August 1, 2018 at 2:55:08 PM 
To: "FEMA-ALL" <FEMA-ALL@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Not On My Watch (Part 2): Employee Resources 

FEMA Team, 

I would like to reiterate that ensuring FEMA maintains a safe work environment is extremely important to me 
and to my leadership team. As stated in my previous message, you should know that FEMA has a zero-
tolerance policy for all types of harassment. If you feel you have been harassed or if you witness inappropriate 
behavior by anyone against a fellow employee, I am asking you to report it. I am attaching two documents that 
provide information on where you can do so. 

I recognize that you may find it difficult to make allegations about discrimination or harassment of any type. 
You may feel concerned that you are at risk and worry about how filing a complaint may impact your career. I 
want to assure you that any employee can file a complaint without fear of reprisal because I have a zero-
tolerance policy against retaliation. 

Sexual harassment isn’t limited to just making inappropriate advances. It also includes any unwelcome verbal or 
physical behavior that creates a hostile work environment whether it occurs inside or outside the workplace or 
through social media platforms. No one should be subjected to any such behavior by anyone you may come into 
contact with as part of your job, including managers, co-workers, contractors or Agency partners.  

When allegations of this type are brought to the Agency’s attention, I can assure you that they will be 
investigated promptly, and upon conclusion, appropriate action will be taken. As mentioned in Monday’s 
message, my leadership team is establishing an Office of Professional Responsibility to ensure expeditious, fair, 
and objective follow-up and resolution of allegations of misconduct.   

The attached documents will answer questions about the steps to report harassment claims.  There is also useful 
information on reporting an incident to the Anti-Harassment Unit.  Counseling services and health and wellness 
advisors are available to all FEMA employees who may not have received the support they needed in the past. 

As I’ve said before, everyone in this Agency is responsible for creating a culture of trust, mutual respect, and 
dignity in our treatment of employees and for all of those we serve. I will accept nothing less.   

129

 
 
It’s important to note that the few individuals participating in this behavior by no means define the majority of 
the honorable, well-intentioned, and well-qualified employees who give this Agency their best every day. I want 
you to know I appreciate your efforts and I will always support and defend you. 

130

  
  
From: femamax@gmail.com <femamax@gmail.com>  
Sent: Thursday, February 27, 2020 12:07 PM 
To: 'Alexander, Dennis' <dennis.alexander@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: DEFICIENCY 

I understand your position Dennis but I do have a different perspective of my performance. 
To condemn me to purgatory over 2 emails out of several thousand that I have sent reeks of pettiness at a minimum. 
You know what is going on here so we’ll let sleeping dogs lie. 
My performance has been effective as indicated below but everyone can tell a story the way they wish. 
Appreciate your kind and professional feedback. 

Staff 
Name 

RTM 
Completed 
Tasks 

Staff Name 

REVIEW AND 
COMPLETE EEI 

Staff Name 

PDMG 
COMPLETE 
DDD 

Staff Name 

COMPLETE 
PROJECT 
SCOPE 
AND COST 
ROUTING 

Staff Name 

PDMG REVIEW 
DDD/SCOPE/COST 

Staff Name 

PDMG 
REVIEW 
SCOPE/COST 

Staff Name 

COMPLETE 
INITIAL 
PROJECT 
DEVELOPMENT 

Denson, 
Melva E. 

MEINDL, 
MAX 

Teston, 
Sheree R. 

Cassidy, 
Richard 

Legere, 
Shane C. 

Miller, 
summer 
M. 

White, 
Richard A. 

JOHNSON, 
BRENDA 
R. 

Phillips, 
Natalie M. 

9 

9 

9 

8 

8 

8 

7 

6 

6 

CLEBOURN-
MCPHERSO, 
TOYA V. 

Phillips, 
Natalie M. 

Davis, 
Henry E. 

MEINDL, 
MAX 

SHERMAN, 
ZERA R. 

Denson, 
Melva E. 

Simonson, 
Nikolas 

Afolayan, 
Akinlabi A. 

LaPoten, 
Halden 

460 

394 

340 

260 

228 

226 

210 

172 

170 

Phillips, 
Natalie M. 

Denson, 
Melva E. 

SHERMAN, 
ZERA R. 

Afolayan, 
Akinlabi A. 

FOSTER, 
SHONDALON 
G. 

CLEBOURN-
MCPHERSO, 
TOYA V. 

Simonson, 
Nikolas 

MEINDL, 
MAX 

Bassett, 
Jerone 

621 

464 

384 

361 

354 

347 

238 

202 

185 

SHERMAN, 
ZERA R. 

MEINDL, 
MAX 

Phillips, 
Natalie M. 

Bassett, 
Jerone 

Denson, 
Melva E. 

Simonson, 
Nikolas 

FOSTER, 
SHONDALON 
G. 

Cassidy, 
Richard 

Marchetto, 
Jeffrey 

182 

162 

162 

123 

106 

101 

84 

80 

79 

MEINDL, 
MAX 

CLEBOURN-
MCPHERSO, 
TOYA V. 

Phillips, 
Natalie M. 

Davis, 
Henry E. 

Cassidy, 
Richard 

Burris, 
Terry L. 

LaPoten, 
Halden 

Denson, 
Melva E. 

RABSATT 
JR, ECEDRO 

158 

147 

135 

131 

96 

83 

81 

77 

76 

Legere, 
Shane C. 

Marchetto, 
Jeffrey 

Phillips, 
Natalie M. 

ALJABBARY, 
MWAFAQ 

Simonson, 
Nikolas 

MEINDL, 
MAX 

SHERMAN, 
ZERA R. 

Vulgamore, 
Joe R. 

Denson, 
Melva E. 

122 

102 

95 

75 

73 

70 

69 

63 

55 

MEINDL, 
MAX 

CLEBOURN-
MCPHERSO, 
TOYA V. 

Phillips, 
Natalie M. 

Davis, 
Henry E. 

SHERMAN, 
ZERA R. 

Bassett, 
Jerone 

JOHNSON, 
BRENDA R. 

Afolayan, 
Akinlabi A. 

Simonson, 
Nikolas 

501 

408 

404 

356 

288 

264 

253 

235 

220 

Staff Name 

MEINDL, 
MAX 

Phillips, 
Natalie M. 

Burris, 
Terry L. 

RABSATT 
JR, ECEDRO 

SHERMAN, 
ZERA R. 

CLEBOURN-
MCPHERSO, 
TOYA V. 

Simonson, 
Nikolas 

Cassidy, 
Richard 

ALJABBARY, 
MWAFAQ 

REVIEW 
CREATED 
RFI 
(PDMG) 

Staff Name 

VERIFY 
RFI 
(PDMG) 

Staff Name 

COMPLETE 
WORK 
ORDER 

55 

26 

20 

17 

16 

15 

15 

14 

13 

MEINDL, 
MAX 

Phillips, 
Natalie M. 

RABSATT JR, 
ECEDRO 

Simonson, 
Nikolas 

LaPoten, 
Halden 

Cassidy, 
Richard 

d'Amecourt, 
John C. 

Patten, 
Russell E. 

Sanders, 
Marlys 

63 

15 

14 

14 

13 

12 

11 

11 

10 

CLEBOURN-
MCPHERSO, 
TOYA V. 

Phillips, 
Natalie M. 

SHERMAN, 
ZERA R. 

Bassett, 
Jerone 

Stevens, 
Mark D. 

MEINDL, 
MAX 

Simonson, 
Nikolas 

Marchetto, 
Jeffrey 

Vulgamore, 
Joe R. 

118 

102 

58 

42 

41 

30 

29 

28 

28 

 
femamax@gmail.com

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>
Monday, October 28, 2019 1:27 PM
femamax@gmail.com
FW: FMLA Determination 

___________________________________ 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov<mailto:max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
[fema] 
WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA. 
It may contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552). 
The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel 
who do not have a valid "need-to-know" without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Meindl, Max 
Sent: Wednesday, June 26, 2019 1:52 PM 
To: Alexander, Dennis <dennis.alexander@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: FMLA Determination 

Here's the email stipulating the approval, the other emails were discussion on the FMLA. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov<mailto:max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
[fema]  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain information 
exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein 
must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to 
FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid "need-to-know" 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Gause, Jacqueline 
Sent: Thursday, May 2, 2019 9:03 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>; Agaiby, Angela <angela.agaiby@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie 
<jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian <Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cc: Obasa, Babajide <babajide.obasa@fema.dhs.gov>; Guelzow, Nicole <nicole.guelzow@fema.dhs.gov>; David, Patricia 
<Patricia.David@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FMLA Determination 

Good morning, 

As discussed, I want to cycle back to you to let you know that your request for FMLA has been approved effective 
5/01/2019.  I have copied Jamie McAllister on this communication as well. 

The Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA)<https://www.dol.gov/whd/fmla/> generally provides employees with up to 
12 weeks of unpaid, job-protected leave per year once an employee is determined to be eligible. 

With regards to WebTA, please ensure that the appropriate leave i.e. annual, sick, or leave without pay is annotated 
under the Family and Medical Leave Act of (FMLA), as appropriate when submitting your time. 

As always, please let me know if you have additional questions. 

Regards, 

Jacqueline Gause, MSc 
Human Resources 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Department of Homeland Security 
Hurricane Harvey-DR4332-TX 
Texas Recovery Office 
Houston, TX 
Mobile: 202-322-6241 

2

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
femamax@gmail.com

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>
Wednesday, November 6, 2019 11:49 AM
Gause, Jacqueline
femamax@gmail.com
RE: FMLA/Reasonable accommodation 

JG, 
Appreciate the update and to provide some background/foundation I submit the following: 

  1.  Within your documentation your physician states you have a disabling medical condition which needs to be 
accommodated. 
     *   Yes, the current situation is challenging and for which some reasonable understanding on behalf of my employer 
would be appreciated. 
     *   I think Dr. Gay was referencing my frustration at my commentary to him about my being under very 
specific/detailed observation by management after being advised that "you are being watched" by someone who would 
know in a conversation that "never happened". 
  2.  As you know on prior occasions I have recommended you request a Reasonable Accommodations for your 
condition. 
     *   I may take another look at the RA but, I'm of the opinion, based upon my previous experience, that that program is 
not one that FEMA embraces. 
     *   The boilerplate, inaccurate and untimely response to my initial RA relied heavily on the "agreement" to the terms 
of employment and I don't see that changing. 
     *   Besides changing the actual dates of my application for RA in their response, the boilerplate nature of the response 
speaks volumes. 
     *   FEMA region 6 does not embrace telework for some reason, and that would be the absolute best accommodation 
for me by relieving me of the 600 miles I endure for my weekly commute. 
     *   The commute is painful in my legs, because of the circulatory problems, but I'll do what I have to do to keep my job 
because I need it. 
     *   Working also helps in my healing process by redirecting my attention and keeping me positive and laughing with 
my office mates. 
  3.  I have attached the FEMA Form 256 for your review and consideration again. 
     *   Thank you, I'll  look at it. 
  4.  Your physician indicates you need scheduling flexibility therefore I have prepared the form for you in draft to 
consider. 
     *   The FMLA allows for intermittent/episodic time off of short duration, 1-2 hours or so, and that is all I require as far 
as flexibility. 
     *   I really need to try to get in my 8 hour days because I've take quite a hit to the pocketbook with all of the LWOP 
I've had to take tis year, so I'm focusing on engaging a 9-5:30 regime that allows me more flexibility in the mornings, 
which typically are my most challenging times. 
  5.  Your physician also indicated that your absences may become more excessive. 
     *   I wouldn't say excessive absences, but I do have pulmonary issues that require attention and weekly Cardio-rehab 
coming up soon, 1 hour a week for 3 months, but I had the location changed to the Methodist Hospital Willowbrook, 
across 249, so I can do the rehab conveniently from work without having to drive across town and lose time. 
     *   I do think he referenced the 1-3 hours, daily for x number of months, but that is more relating to my issues in the 
morning, which I am trying to address by coming in at 9 and working later to accommodate the morning challenges. 
  6.  If this occurs then at that time we will work with you accordingly to see if other arrangements need to be made. 
     *   I appreciate your support and kind concern. 

1

 
 
___________________________________ 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov<mailto:max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
[fema] 
WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA. 
It may contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552). 
The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel 
who do not have a valid "need-to-know" without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov> 
Sent: Wednesday, November 6, 2019 11:20 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FMLA/Reasonable accommodation 

Good morning, 

Thank you for providing the FMLA update information. Your FMLA file has been updated accordingly. Within your 
documentation your physician states you have a disabling medical condition which needs to be accommodated. As you 
know on prior occasions I have recommended you request a Reasonable Accommodations for your condition.  I have 
attached the FEMA Form 256 for your review and consideration again. Your physician indicates you need scheduling 
flexibility therefore I have prepared the form for you in draft to consider. Your physician also indicated that your 
absences may become more excessive. If this occurs then at that time we will work with you accordingly to see if other 
arrangements need to be made. 

The ERO Lead for the TRO is Keya Jackson (202-856-1961). You can reach out to her with any questions you may have 
about the reasonable accommodations process. 

Please let me know if you have any other questions or concerns. 

Regards, 

Jacqueline Gause, MSc 
Human Resources 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Department of Homeland Security 
Hurricane Harvey-DR4332-TX 
Texas Recovery Office 
Houston, TX 
Mobile: 202-322-6241 

2

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
femamax@gmail.com

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov>
Wednesday, November 6, 2019 12:26 PM
Meindl, Max
femamax@gmail.com
RE: FMLA/Reasonable accommodation 

Flag Status:

Flagged

Good afternoon,  

Thank you for the additional clarification. You may also be able to work with ERO on the medical telework piece.  

Please let me know if you need anything else.  

Regards,  

Jacqueline Gause, MSc 
Human Resources 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Department of Homeland Security 
Hurricane Harvey-DR4332-TX 
Texas Recovery Office  
Houston, TX 
Mobile: 202-322-6241 

From: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>  
Sent: Wednesday, November 6, 2019 11:49 AM 
To: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: femamax@gmail.com 
Subject: RE: FMLA/Reasonable accommodation  

JG, 
Appreciate the update and to provide some background/foundation I submit the following: 

1.  Within your documentation your physician states you have a disabling medical condition which needs to be 

accommodated. 

a.  Yes, the current situation is challenging and for which some reasonable understanding on behalf of my 

b. 

employer would be appreciated.   
I think Dr. Gay was referencing my frustration at my commentary to him about my being under very 
specific/detailed observation by management after being advised that “you are being watched” by 
someone who would know in a conversation that “never happened”. 

2.  As you know on prior occasions I have recommended you request a Reasonable Accommodations for your 

condition.  
a. 

I may take another look at the RA but, I’m of the opinion, based upon my previous experience, that that 
program is not one that FEMA embraces.   

b.  The boilerplate, inaccurate and untimely response to my initial RA relied heavily on the “agreement” to the 

terms of employment and I don’t see that changing.   

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
c.  Besides changing the actual dates of my application for RA in their response, the boilerplate nature of the 

response speaks volumes.  

d.  FEMA region 6 does not embrace telework for some reason, and that would be the absolute best 
accommodation for me by relieving me of the 600 miles I endure for my weekly commute.   

e.  The commute is painful in my legs, because of the circulatory problems, but I’ll do what I have to do to 

keep my job because I need it.   

f.  Working also helps in my healing process by redirecting my attention and keeping me positive and 

laughing with my office mates. 

3. 

I have attached the FEMA Form 256 for your review and consideration again. 

a.  Thank you, I’ll  look at it.  

4.  Your physician indicates you need scheduling flexibility therefore I have prepared the form for you in draft to 

consider. 

a.  The FMLA allows for intermittent/episodic time off of short duration, 1-2 hours or so, and that is all I 

b. 

require as far as flexibility.   
I really need to try to get in my 8 hour days because I’ve take quite a hit to the pocketbook with all of the 
LWOP I’ve had to take tis year, so I’m focusing on engaging a 9-5:30 regime that allows me more flexibility 
in the mornings, which typically are my most challenging times.  

5.  Your physician also indicated that your absences may become more excessive.  

a. 

b. 

I wouldn’t say excessive absences, but I do have pulmonary issues that require attention and weekly 
Cardio-rehab coming up soon, 1 hour a week for 3 months, but I had the location changed to the 
Methodist Hospital Willowbrook, across 249, so I can do the rehab conveniently from work without having 
to drive across town and lose time.   
I do think he referenced the 1-3 hours, daily for x number of months, but that is more relating to my issues 
in the morning, which I am trying to address by coming in at 9 and working later to accommodate the 
morning challenges. 

6. 

If this occurs then at that time we will work with you accordingly to see if other arrangements need to be made. 

a. 

I appreciate your support and kind concern. 

___________________________________ 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.   
It may contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).   
The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to 
be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov>  
Sent: Wednesday, November 6, 2019 11:20 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FMLA/Reasonable accommodation  

Good morning,  

2

 
   
 
 
 
Thank you for providing the FMLA update information. Your FMLA file has been updated accordingly. Within your 
documentation your physician states you have a disabling medical condition which needs to be accommodated. As you 
know on prior occasions I have recommended you request a Reasonable Accommodations for your condition.  I have 
attached the FEMA Form 256 for your review and consideration again. Your physician indicates you need scheduling 
flexibility therefore I have prepared the form for you in draft to consider. Your physician also indicated that your 
absences may become more excessive. If this occurs then at that time we will work with you accordingly to see if other 
arrangements need to be made.  

The ERO Lead for the TRO is Keya Jackson (202-856-1961). You can reach out to her with any questions you may have 
about the reasonable accommodations process.  

Please let me know if you have any other questions or concerns. 

Regards,  

Jacqueline Gause, MSc 
Human Resources 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Department of Homeland Security 
Hurricane Harvey-DR4332-TX 
Texas Recovery Office  
Houston, TX 
Mobile: 202-322-6241 

3

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
U.S. Department of Homeland Security 
Washington, D.C. 20472 

MEMORANDUM FOR:  Max Meindl 

March 8, 2019 

Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 

FROM: 

            Jamie McAllister 

Deputy Infrastructure Branch Director  

                                                DR 4332 TX JFO Austin 
                                                Region 6 Infrastructure Branch 
                                                DHS/FEMA 

SUBJECT:  

Request for To Telework 

This serves to deny your reasonable accommodation request for episodic telework dated November 
26, 2018. 

As your Supervisor of Record (SOR), I reviewed your signed 256 Form, and medical documentation 
submitted in support of your request to telework as a reasonable accommodation. 

In order for a reasonable accommodation to be provided, it must first be determined that the 
individual making the request is a qualified individual with a disability. A qualified individual 
defined is as "an individual who, with or without reasonable accommodation, can perform the 
essential functions of the employment position that such individual holds or desires." 42 U.S.C. § 
12111(8). 

42 U.S. Code § 12102 defines the term “disability” with respect to an individual as: 
(A) A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities of 
such individual;  

(B)   a record of such an impairment; or  

(C)   being regarded as having such an impairment. 

The EEOC defines a reasonable accommodation as any change in the workplace or in the way things 
are customarily done that provides an equal employment opportunity to an individual with a 
disability when an employee with a disability needs an accommodation to perform the essential 
functions of the job held. 

The EEOC defines essential functions as those job duties that are fundamental to the position that the 
individual holds or desires. According to the EEOC, evidence of whether a particular function is 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
U.S. Department of Homeland Security 
Washington, D.C. 20472 

essential includes the agency's judgment (generally a supervisor's, manager's and/or office director's 
judgment), and a written position description developed before a job is advertised.  

The job announcement for the Cadre of On-call Response/Recovery Employee (CORE) position 
states:  

“All candidates must be able to deploy with little or no advance notice to anywhere in the United 
States and its territories for an extended period of time. Deployments may include working in excess 
of eight hours a day, or in excess of 40 hours per week, including weekends and holidays, and under 
stressful, physically demanding, and austere conditions.”  

In Demyanovich v. Cadon Plating and Coatings, LLC, 747 F.3d 419 (6th Cir. 2014), the court found 
that “a written job description and the employer’s judgment constitute evidence of whether a 
particular job function is essential”.  At the Texas Recovery Office Public Assistance Cadre (TRO 
PA) telework is not allowed for emergency management employees outside of very limited weather-
related cases. Management has determined it is an essential job function to travel to the office and 
visit applicants in person at their office location.   

Further, pursuant to 29 U.S.C. § 701 et seq., the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, an employer is not 
required to eliminate an essential function of a position in response to a request for reasonable 
accommodation.  Also, see (Minnihan v. Mediacom Commc’ns Corp., 779 F.3d 803 (8th Cir. 2015).  
Your request to telework would require removal of an essential job function.  The appropriate 
accommodation would be a reassignment to a position that allows telework. Should you choose to 
appeal the SOR’s decision, you may do so using the following procedure: 

Request for reconsideration: 

If an individual wishes to request reconsideration of this decision, she/he must take the 
following steps: 

An employee may appeal directly to his/her Second Level Supervisor. The employee may 
present additional information in support of his/her request. 

An applicant may appeal directly to the Disability Employment Program Manager of the 
Office of Equal Rights. The applicant may present additional information in support of 
his/her request. 

If an individual wishes to file an EEO Complaint, or to pursue MSPB or union grievance 
procedures, she/he must take the following steps: 

For an EEO complaint pursuant to 29 C.F.R. 1614, contact an EEO Counselor in the Office 
of Equal Rights within 45 days from the date of this denial of reasonable accommodation; or 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
U.S. Department of Homeland Security 
Washington, D.C. 20472 

For a collective bargaining claim, file a written grievance in accordance with the provisions 
of the Collective Bargaining Agreement; or 

Initiate an appeal to the Merit Systems Protection Board within 30 days of an appealable 
adverse action as defined in 5 C.F.R. 1201.3 

_____________________________   
Name & Title of Deciding Official 

______________________________ 
Signature of Deciding Official 

_____________________________   
Date  

Acknowledgement of Receipt: 

Please sign the acknowledgement of receipt below. Your signature does not indicate agreement 
with this decision, and by signing, you do not forfeit any of your rights cited above. Your 
signature only represents your receipt of this decision on the date signed. 

_______________________________ 
Max Meindl 

________________ 
DATE 

Jamie McAllister, Deputy IBD 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

See attached 

Meindl, Max
Thursday, August 23, 2018 1:08 PM
Terry, Detra
RA
Reasonable Accomodation-FEMA Form 256-0-1-08232018.pdf

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

1

 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:

Subject:
Attachments:

Detra, 
RA form attached. 

Meindl, Max
Thursday, August 23, 2018 1:11 PM
Terry, Detra
Oke, Nicole; McPhie, Regina; FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation; Goudy, Douglas; Henri, Foudiya; Avery, Darlene; 
femamax@gmail.com
RA
Reasonable Accomodation-FEMA Form 256-0-1-08232018.pdf

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

2

 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:
Attachments:

Max: 

FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation
Thursday, August 23, 2018 9:22 PM
Meindl, Max
FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation; Maddox Britt, Sandra
RE: RA
RA INFORMATION SHEET-empl.doc

The Office of Equal Rights/Reasonable Accommodation Unit has received your reasonable accommodation (RA) 
request.  The case has been assigned to Sandra Maddox Britt, Reasonable Accommodation Analyst.  Please fill out the 
attached information sheet to complete your file and send to her.  Ms. Maddox-Britt will contact you soon to facilitate 
the RA process.  If you have any questions, Ms. Maddox-Britt will assist.  I have omitted the other individuals you 
copied in the e-mail.  The RA process is a confidential one and only individuals with the need to know should be 
involved. 

Respectfully, 

Luz A. Fernandez 
Equal Rights Specialist | AEP/RA Lead | DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0915, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | 
Desk: 202.212.2740 | Mobile: 202.805.8638 | Efax: 540.504.2816 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official 
Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered 
by Federal and state laws governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability with 
civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise use the information. Please reply immediately to the 
sender and delete this message.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 2:11 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Oke, Nicole <nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; FEMA-Reasonable-
Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas <Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, 
Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; femamax@gmail.com 
Subject: RA 

Detra, 
RA form attached. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

3

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

4

 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:

Subject:

FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation
Thursday, August 23, 2018 9:26 PM
Meindl, Max; Terry, Detra
Oke, Nicole; McPhie, Regina; FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation; Goudy, Douglas; Henri, Foudiya; Avery, Darlene; 
femamax@gmail.com
RE: RA

Case assigned to Sandra Maddox-Britt. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 2:11 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Oke, Nicole <nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; FEMA-Reasonable-
Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas <Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, 
Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; femamax@gmail.com 
Subject: RA 

Detra, 
RA form attached. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

5

 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Henri, Foudiya
Tuesday, August 28, 2018 11:28 AM
Meindl, Max
Goudy, Douglas
Max Meindl request for Reasonable Accommodation

Importance:

High

Hello Max, 
What is the name of your Supervisor please?_____________.  Was the RA request sent to the Supervisor? If yes please let me 
know.  I can assist with the RA request ONLY. 

For Informal Complaint assistance please contact Doug Goudy directly.   

Thank you, 
Foudiya Henri 
202-394-4633 Cell 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 2:11 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Oke, Nicole <nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; FEMA-Reasonable-
Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas <Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, 
Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; femamax@gmail.com 
Subject: RA 

Detra, 
RA form attached. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

6

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Maddox Britt, Sandra
Wednesday, August 29, 2018 9:31 AM
Meindl, Max
RE: RA Request (Meindl)
FEMA Form 256-0-1.pdf

Hello Mr. Meindl 
I have received an email from Ms. Fernandez indicating that you have an RA request.  The document attached to the email, 
however, is blank.  Can you please send me the form you completed?   

Also, who is your Supervisor of Record, and did you provide the form to your supervisor of Record?   

Thank you 
Sandra Britt 
202-412-4787 

From: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 10:22 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra 
<sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA 

Max: 

The Office of Equal Rights/Reasonable Accommodation Unit has received your reasonable accommodation (RA) 
request.  The case has been assigned to Sandra Maddox Britt, Reasonable Accommodation Analyst.  Please fill out the 
attached information sheet to complete your file and send to her.  Ms. Maddox-Britt will contact you soon to facilitate 
the RA process.  If you have any questions, Ms. Maddox-Britt will assist.  I have omitted the other individuals you 
copied in the e-mail.  The RA process is a confidential one and only individuals with the need to know should be 
involved. 

Respectfully, 

Luz A. Fernandez 
Equal Rights Specialist | AEP/RA Lead | DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0915, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | 
Desk: 202.212.2740 | Mobile: 202.805.8638 | Efax: 540.504.2816 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official 
Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered 
by Federal and state laws governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability with 
civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise use the information. Please reply immediately to the 
sender and delete this message.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 2:11 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Oke, Nicole <nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; FEMA-Reasonable-
Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas <Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, 
Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; femamax@gmail.com 
Subject: RA 

Detra, 

7

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RA form attached. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

8

 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, August 29, 2018 9:38 AM
Maddox Britt, Sandra
RE: RA Request (Meindl)
Reasonable Accomodation-FEMA Form 256-0-1-08232018.pdf

Yes, I provided it to my supervisor. 
My chain of command as I understand it: 
Detra Terry, Task Force Lead 
Detra S. Terry 
Public Assistance-PDM/DIS 
DR-4332-TX 
202.718.0109|iFEMA cell 
detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov 

  Albert P. Walters III 
Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
Disaster 4332 – Harvey 
Cell Phone 504-570-4412 
Albert.Walters@FEMA.DHS.GOV 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Maddox Britt, Sandra  
Sent: Wednesday, August 29, 2018 9:31 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request (Meindl) 

Hello Mr. Meindl 
I have received an email from Ms. Fernandez indicating that you have an RA request.  The document attached to the email, 
however, is blank.  Can you please send me the form you completed?   

Also, who is your Supervisor of Record, and did you provide the form to your supervisor of Record?   

Thank you 
Sandra Britt 
202-412-4787 

9

             
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 10:22 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra 
<sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA 

Max: 

The Office of Equal Rights/Reasonable Accommodation Unit has received your reasonable accommodation (RA) 
request.  The case has been assigned to Sandra Maddox Britt, Reasonable Accommodation Analyst.  Please fill out the 
attached information sheet to complete your file and send to her.  Ms. Maddox-Britt will contact you soon to facilitate 
the RA process.  If you have any questions, Ms. Maddox-Britt will assist.  I have omitted the other individuals you 
copied in the e-mail.  The RA process is a confidential one and only individuals with the need to know should be 
involved. 

Respectfully, 

Luz A. Fernandez 
Equal Rights Specialist | AEP/RA Lead | DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0915, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | 
Desk: 202.212.2740 | Mobile: 202.805.8638 | Efax: 540.504.2816 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official 
Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered 
by Federal and state laws governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability with 
civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise use the information. Please reply immediately to the 
sender and delete this message.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 2:11 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Oke, Nicole <nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; FEMA-Reasonable-
Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas <Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, 
Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; femamax@gmail.com 
Subject: RA 

Detra, 
RA form attached. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

10

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11

 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Who is your supervisor? 

Maddox Britt, Sandra
Thursday, September 6, 2018 4:35 PM
Meindl, Max
RE: RA Request (Meindl)

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, August 29, 2018 10:38 AM 
To: Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request (Meindl) 

Yes, I provided it to my supervisor. 
My chain of command as I understand it: 
Detra Terry, Task Force Lead 
Detra S. Terry 
Public Assistance-PDM/DIS 
DR-4332-TX 
202.718.0109|iFEMA cell 
detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov 

  Albert P. Walters III 
Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
Disaster 4332 – Harvey 
Cell Phone 504-570-4412 
Albert.Walters@FEMA.DHS.GOV 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Maddox Britt, Sandra  
Sent: Wednesday, August 29, 2018 9:31 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request (Meindl) 

Hello Mr. Meindl 
I have received an email from Ms. Fernandez indicating that you have an RA request.  The document attached to the email, 
however, is blank.  Can you please send me the form you completed?   

12

 
 
             
 
 
 
 
 
Also, who is your Supervisor of Record, and did you provide the form to your supervisor of Record?   

Thank you 
Sandra Britt 
202-412-4787 

From: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 10:22 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra 
<sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA 

Max: 

The Office of Equal Rights/Reasonable Accommodation Unit has received your reasonable accommodation (RA) 
request.  The case has been assigned to Sandra Maddox Britt, Reasonable Accommodation Analyst.  Please fill out the 
attached information sheet to complete your file and send to her.  Ms. Maddox-Britt will contact you soon to facilitate 
the RA process.  If you have any questions, Ms. Maddox-Britt will assist.  I have omitted the other individuals you 
copied in the e-mail.  The RA process is a confidential one and only individuals with the need to know should be 
involved. 

Respectfully, 

Luz A. Fernandez 
Equal Rights Specialist | AEP/RA Lead | DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0915, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | 
Desk: 202.212.2740 | Mobile: 202.805.8638 | Efax: 540.504.2816 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official 
Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered 
by Federal and state laws governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability with 
civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise use the information. Please reply immediately to the 
sender and delete this message.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 2:11 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Oke, Nicole <nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; FEMA-Reasonable-
Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas <Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, 
Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; femamax@gmail.com 
Subject: RA 

Detra, 
RA form attached. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

13

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

14

 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Maddox Britt, Sandra
Thursday, September 6, 2018 4:37 PM
Meindl, Max
RE: RA Request (Meindl)

Never mind, I thought the name below was your signature block.  So you are in PA at HQ?  If so, I need to refer you to PA’s RA 
POCs. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, August 29, 2018 10:38 AM 
To: Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request (Meindl) 

Yes, I provided it to my supervisor. 
My chain of command as I understand it: 
Detra Terry, Task Force Lead 
Detra S. Terry 
Public Assistance-PDM/DIS 
DR-4332-TX 
202.718.0109|iFEMA cell 
detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov 

  Albert P. Walters III 
Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
Disaster 4332 – Harvey 
Cell Phone 504-570-4412 
Albert.Walters@FEMA.DHS.GOV 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Maddox Britt, Sandra  
Sent: Wednesday, August 29, 2018 9:31 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request (Meindl) 

Hello Mr. Meindl 

15

 
 
             
 
 
 
 
 
I have received an email from Ms. Fernandez indicating that you have an RA request.  The document attached to the email, 
however, is blank.  Can you please send me the form you completed?   

Also, who is your Supervisor of Record, and did you provide the form to your supervisor of Record?   

Thank you 
Sandra Britt 
202-412-4787 

From: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 10:22 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra 
<sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA 

Max: 

The Office of Equal Rights/Reasonable Accommodation Unit has received your reasonable accommodation (RA) 
request.  The case has been assigned to Sandra Maddox Britt, Reasonable Accommodation Analyst.  Please fill out the 
attached information sheet to complete your file and send to her.  Ms. Maddox-Britt will contact you soon to facilitate 
the RA process.  If you have any questions, Ms. Maddox-Britt will assist.  I have omitted the other individuals you 
copied in the e-mail.  The RA process is a confidential one and only individuals with the need to know should be 
involved. 

Respectfully, 

Luz A. Fernandez 
Equal Rights Specialist | AEP/RA Lead | DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0915, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | 
Desk: 202.212.2740 | Mobile: 202.805.8638 | Efax: 540.504.2816 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official 
Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered 
by Federal and state laws governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability with 
civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise use the information. Please reply immediately to the 
sender and delete this message.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 2:11 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Oke, Nicole <nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; FEMA-Reasonable-
Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas <Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, 
Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; femamax@gmail.com 
Subject: RA 

Detra, 
RA form attached. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

16

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

17

 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Thursday, September 6, 2018 4:39 PM
Maddox Britt, Sandra
Re: RA Request (Meindl)

Houston Recovery Office, PA 

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Maddox Britt, Sandra 
Sent: Thursday, September 6, 2018 4:36:49 PM 
To: Meindl, Max 
Subject: RE: RA Request (Meindl)  

Never mind, I thought the name below was your signature block.  So you are in PA at HQ?  If so, I need to refer you to PA’s RA 
POCs. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, August 29, 2018 10:38 AM 
To: Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request (Meindl) 

Yes, I provided it to my supervisor. 
My chain of command as I understand it: 
Detra Terry, Task Force Lead 
Detra S. Terry 
Public Assistance-PDM/DIS 
DR-4332-TX 
202.718.0109|iFEMA cell 
detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov 

  Albert P. Walters III 
Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
Disaster 4332 – Harvey 
Cell Phone 504-570-4412 
Albert.Walters@FEMA.DHS.GOV 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

18

 
  
  
  
             
  
  
  
From: Maddox Britt, Sandra  
Sent: Wednesday, August 29, 2018 9:31 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request (Meindl) 

Hello Mr. Meindl 
I have received an email from Ms. Fernandez indicating that you have an RA request.  The document attached to the email, 
however, is blank.  Can you please send me the form you completed?   

Also, who is your Supervisor of Record, and did you provide the form to your supervisor of Record?   

Thank you 
Sandra Britt 
202-412-4787 

From: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 10:22 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra 
<sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA 

Max: 

The Office of Equal Rights/Reasonable Accommodation Unit has received your reasonable accommodation (RA) 
request.  The case has been assigned to Sandra Maddox Britt, Reasonable Accommodation Analyst.  Please fill out the 
attached information sheet to complete your file and send to her.  Ms. Maddox-Britt will contact you soon to facilitate 
the RA process.  If you have any questions, Ms. Maddox-Britt will assist.  I have omitted the other individuals you 
copied in the e-mail.  The RA process is a confidential one and only individuals with the need to know should be 
involved. 

Respectfully, 

Luz A. Fernandez 
Equal Rights Specialist | AEP/RA Lead | DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0915, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | 
Desk: 202.212.2740 | Mobile: 202.805.8638 | Efax: 540.504.2816 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official 
Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered 
by Federal and state laws governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability with 
civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise use the information. Please reply immediately to the 
sender and delete this message.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 2:11 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Oke, Nicole <nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; FEMA-Reasonable-
Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas <Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, 
Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; femamax@gmail.com 
Subject: RA 

Detra, 
RA form attached. 

19

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

20

  
  
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Maddox Britt, Sandra
Thursday, September 6, 2018 4:52 PM
Meindl, Max
RE: RA Request (Meindl)

Please forward your medical documentation to me. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, August 29, 2018 10:38 AM 
To: Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request (Meindl) 

Yes, I provided it to my supervisor. 
My chain of command as I understand it: 
Detra Terry, Task Force Lead 
Detra S. Terry 
Public Assistance-PDM/DIS 
DR-4332-TX 
202.718.0109|iFEMA cell 
detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov 

  Albert P. Walters III 
Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
Disaster 4332 – Harvey 
Cell Phone 504-570-4412 
Albert.Walters@FEMA.DHS.GOV 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Maddox Britt, Sandra  
Sent: Wednesday, August 29, 2018 9:31 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request (Meindl) 

Hello Mr. Meindl 
I have received an email from Ms. Fernandez indicating that you have an RA request.  The document attached to the email, 
however, is blank.  Can you please send me the form you completed?   

21

 
 
             
 
 
 
 
 
Also, who is your Supervisor of Record, and did you provide the form to your supervisor of Record?   

Thank you 
Sandra Britt 
202-412-4787 

From: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 10:22 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra 
<sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA 

Max: 

The Office of Equal Rights/Reasonable Accommodation Unit has received your reasonable accommodation (RA) 
request.  The case has been assigned to Sandra Maddox Britt, Reasonable Accommodation Analyst.  Please fill out the 
attached information sheet to complete your file and send to her.  Ms. Maddox-Britt will contact you soon to facilitate 
the RA process.  If you have any questions, Ms. Maddox-Britt will assist.  I have omitted the other individuals you 
copied in the e-mail.  The RA process is a confidential one and only individuals with the need to know should be 
involved. 

Respectfully, 

Luz A. Fernandez 
Equal Rights Specialist | AEP/RA Lead | DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0915, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | 
Desk: 202.212.2740 | Mobile: 202.805.8638 | Efax: 540.504.2816 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official 
Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered 
by Federal and state laws governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability with 
civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise use the information. Please reply immediately to the 
sender and delete this message.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 2:11 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Oke, Nicole <nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; FEMA-Reasonable-
Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas <Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, 
Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; femamax@gmail.com 
Subject: RA 

Detra, 
RA form attached. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

22

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

23

 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Thursday, September 6, 2018 5:08 PM
Maddox Britt, Sandra
Re: RA Request (Meindl)

Sent from personal email in confidence  

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Maddox Britt, Sandra 
Sent: Thursday, September 6, 2018 4:51:43 PM 
To: Meindl, Max 
Subject: RE: RA Request (Meindl)  

Please forward your medical documentation to me. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, August 29, 2018 10:38 AM 
To: Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request (Meindl) 

Yes, I provided it to my supervisor. 
My chain of command as I understand it: 
Detra Terry, Task Force Lead 
Detra S. Terry 
Public Assistance-PDM/DIS 
DR-4332-TX 
202.718.0109|iFEMA cell 
detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov 

  Albert P. Walters III 
Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
Disaster 4332 – Harvey 
Cell Phone 504-570-4412 
Albert.Walters@FEMA.DHS.GOV 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

24

 
  
  
  
             
  
  
  
  
From: Maddox Britt, Sandra  
Sent: Wednesday, August 29, 2018 9:31 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request (Meindl) 

Hello Mr. Meindl 
I have received an email from Ms. Fernandez indicating that you have an RA request.  The document attached to the email, 
however, is blank.  Can you please send me the form you completed?   

Also, who is your Supervisor of Record, and did you provide the form to your supervisor of Record?   

Thank you 
Sandra Britt 
202-412-4787 

From: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 10:22 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra 
<sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA 

Max: 

The Office of Equal Rights/Reasonable Accommodation Unit has received your reasonable accommodation (RA) 
request.  The case has been assigned to Sandra Maddox Britt, Reasonable Accommodation Analyst.  Please fill out the 
attached information sheet to complete your file and send to her.  Ms. Maddox-Britt will contact you soon to facilitate 
the RA process.  If you have any questions, Ms. Maddox-Britt will assist.  I have omitted the other individuals you 
copied in the e-mail.  The RA process is a confidential one and only individuals with the need to know should be 
involved. 

Respectfully, 

Luz A. Fernandez 
Equal Rights Specialist | AEP/RA Lead | DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0915, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | 
Desk: 202.212.2740 | Mobile: 202.805.8638 | Efax: 540.504.2816 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official 
Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered 
by Federal and state laws governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability with 
civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise use the information. Please reply immediately to the 
sender and delete this message.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 2:11 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Oke, Nicole <nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; FEMA-Reasonable-
Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas <Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, 
Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; femamax@gmail.com 
Subject: RA 

Detra, 
RA form attached. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 

25

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

26

  
  
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Merritt, Lisa
Monday, September 17, 2018 2:11 PM
Meindl, Max
Reasonable Accommodation Request

Importance:

High

Hello Max, 

I have received your 256 Reasonable Accommodation Request Form. In addition, we will need supporting 
documentation from your health care provider (on letterhead) to provide to Office of Equal Rights. Below is 
the information that should be included in the letter for a reasonable accommodation request: 

  The nature, severity, or duration of your impairment/disability 
  The extent to which the impairment/disability limits your ability to perform your job 
  Why you require the particular Reasonable Accommodation (what tools do you need to do your job 

i.e. chair, vehicle upgrade / please be very specific) 

  How the accommodation you requested will assist you in performing the essential functions of the job 

Please give me a call, so we can discuss. 

Thank you, 

Cadre Management Team 
Public Assistance Division 
Field Support Branch 
FEMA/HQ 
Reservists Line: 202-212-1028 
FEMA-PA-Reservist-Program@fema.dhs.gov 

27

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Hello Max, 

Merritt, Lisa
Thursday, October 4, 2018 1:12 PM
Meindl, Max
RE: Reasonable Accommodation Request

I reached out last week and left another voicemail. Do you have any questions about the RA process? Anything we need to go 
over together? 

Thank you, 

Lisa Merritt|Asst. Reservist Program Manager 
Public Assistance Division 
Field Support Branch 
FEMA | HQ 
202-212-2524 | lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov  
FEMA-PA-Reservist-Program@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Merritt, Lisa  
Sent: Wednesday, September 26, 2018 1:29 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation Request 

Hello Max, 

I wanted to follow up on your reasonable accommodation. Please give me a call, so I can answer any questions you may have. 

Thank you, 

Lisa Merritt|Asst. Reservist Program Manager 
Public Assistance Division 
Field Support Branch 
FEMA | HQ 
202-212-2524 | lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov  
FEMA-PA-Reservist-Program@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Merritt, Lisa  
Sent: Monday, September 17, 2018 3:11 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation Request 
Importance: High 

Hello Max, 

28

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I have received your 256 Reasonable Accommodation Request Form. In addition, we will need supporting 
documentation from your health care provider (on letterhead) to provide to Office of Equal Rights. Below is 
the information that should be included in the letter for a reasonable accommodation request: 

  The nature, severity, or duration of your impairment/disability 
  The extent to which the impairment/disability limits your ability to perform your job 
  Why you require the particular Reasonable Accommodation (what tools do you need to do your job 

i.e. chair, vehicle upgrade / please be very specific) 

  How the accommodation you requested will assist you in performing the essential functions of the job 

Please give me a call, so we can discuss. 

Thank you, 

Cadre Management Team 
Public Assistance Division 
Field Support Branch 
FEMA/HQ 
Reservists Line: 202-212-1028 
FEMA-PA-Reservist-Program@fema.dhs.gov 

29

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Thursday, October 4, 2018 1:16 PM
Merritt, Lisa
RE: Reasonable Accommodation Request

I have to meet with a cardiologist to obtain requested paperwork. 
The VA does not seem to be interested in putting anything in writing so I am having to see a provider outside the VA system. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Merritt, Lisa  
Sent: Thursday, October 4, 2018 1:12 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation Request 

Hello Max, 

I reached out last week and left another voicemail. Do you have any questions about the RA process? Anything we need to go 
over together? 

Thank you, 

Lisa Merritt|Asst. Reservist Program Manager 
Public Assistance Division 
Field Support Branch 
FEMA | HQ 
202-212-2524 | lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov  
FEMA-PA-Reservist-Program@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Merritt, Lisa  
Sent: Wednesday, September 26, 2018 1:29 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation Request 

Hello Max, 

30

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I wanted to follow up on your reasonable accommodation. Please give me a call, so I can answer any questions you may have. 

Thank you, 

Lisa Merritt|Asst. Reservist Program Manager 
Public Assistance Division 
Field Support Branch 
FEMA | HQ 
202-212-2524 | lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov  
FEMA-PA-Reservist-Program@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Merritt, Lisa  
Sent: Monday, September 17, 2018 3:11 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation Request 
Importance: High 

Hello Max, 

I have received your 256 Reasonable Accommodation Request Form. In addition, we will need supporting 
documentation from your health care provider (on letterhead) to provide to Office of Equal Rights. Below is 
the information that should be included in the letter for a reasonable accommodation request: 

  The nature, severity, or duration of your impairment/disability 
  The extent to which the impairment/disability limits your ability to perform your job 
  Why you require the particular Reasonable Accommodation (what tools do you need to do your job 

i.e. chair, vehicle upgrade / please be very specific) 

  How the accommodation you requested will assist you in performing the essential functions of the job 

Please give me a call, so we can discuss. 

Thank you, 

Cadre Management Team 
Public Assistance Division 
Field Support Branch 
FEMA/HQ 
Reservists Line: 202-212-1028 
FEMA-PA-Reservist-Program@fema.dhs.gov 

31

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Merritt, Lisa
Thursday, October 4, 2018 1:23 PM
Meindl, Max
RE: Reasonable Accommodation Request

Ok, I’m just making sure I can answer any questions you may have. The note needs to be very descriptive and provide all 
information that I sent to you in bullet points. 

Thank you, 

Lisa Merritt|Asst. Reservist Program Manager 
Public Assistance Division 
Field Support Branch 
FEMA | HQ 
202-212-2524 | lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov  
FEMA-PA-Reservist-Program@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, October 4, 2018 2:16 PM 
To: Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation Request 

I have to meet with a cardiologist to obtain requested paperwork. 
The VA does not seem to be interested in putting anything in writing so I am having to see a provider outside the VA system. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Merritt, Lisa  
Sent: Thursday, October 4, 2018 1:12 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation Request 

Hello Max, 

32

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I reached out last week and left another voicemail. Do you have any questions about the RA process? Anything we need to go 
over together? 

Thank you, 

Lisa Merritt|Asst. Reservist Program Manager 
Public Assistance Division 
Field Support Branch 
FEMA | HQ 
202-212-2524 | lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov  
FEMA-PA-Reservist-Program@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Merritt, Lisa  
Sent: Wednesday, September 26, 2018 1:29 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation Request 

Hello Max, 

I wanted to follow up on your reasonable accommodation. Please give me a call, so I can answer any questions you may have. 

Thank you, 

Lisa Merritt|Asst. Reservist Program Manager 
Public Assistance Division 
Field Support Branch 
FEMA | HQ 
202-212-2524 | lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov  
FEMA-PA-Reservist-Program@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Merritt, Lisa  
Sent: Monday, September 17, 2018 3:11 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation Request 
Importance: High 

Hello Max, 

I have received your 256 Reasonable Accommodation Request Form. In addition, we will need supporting 
documentation from your health care provider (on letterhead) to provide to Office of Equal Rights. Below is 
the information that should be included in the letter for a reasonable accommodation request: 

  The nature, severity, or duration of your impairment/disability 
  The extent to which the impairment/disability limits your ability to perform your job 
  Why you require the particular Reasonable Accommodation (what tools do you need to do your job 

i.e. chair, vehicle upgrade / please be very specific) 

  How the accommodation you requested will assist you in performing the essential functions of the job 

Please give me a call, so we can discuss. 

33

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Thank you, 

Cadre Management Team 
Public Assistance Division 
Field Support Branch 
FEMA/HQ 
Reservists Line: 202-212-1028 
FEMA-PA-Reservist-Program@fema.dhs.gov 

34

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:
Attachments:

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

Brathwaite, Winston
Monday, October 15, 2018 1:06 PM
Meindl, Max
FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation
RA Request
RA INFORMATION SHEET-Vista.doc; blank FEMA Form 256-0-1.pdf

My name is Winston Brathwaite. I am a Reasonable Accommodation Analyst in the Office of Equal Rights. It has come to my 
attention that you may have recently applied for a reasonable accommodation. If that is the case, I will be the analyst assigned 
to your case. I have attached to this email for your convenience the RA information sheet, and a blank FEMA 256 Form. Once I 
have received these 2 completed forms, I will begin to expeditiously process your request.  

The reasonable accommodation (RA) request process is a confidential one that must not be shared with anyone that does not 
have a need to know.  Besides the supervisor of record (SOR) no other individual should be included or copied in the process, to 
preserve confidentiality.  The RA process starts with the request of the employee for a reasonable accommodation (RA).  The 
request can be done in any way, verbally, email, letter, etc. The SOR should request that the employee fill out a 256-0-1 form 
(Request for Reasonable Accommodation), attached, indicating what they are requesting as an accommodation, the reason for 
the request and if the request is time sensitive.  The employee must sign and date the request.  When an individual requests an 
RA, there should be an interactive process (meeting) between the SOR and the employee to better understand the employee’s 
request and needs.  If the disability is not obvious (visible), the SOR requests the employee to provide medical documentation to 
support the specific need for the RA requested.  Sufficient medical information provides the following information: 

•             Nature, severity and duration of the disability 
•             What major life activity or activities the disability impairs  
•             How the impairment of the major life activity or activities affects the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position  
•             Limitations that the disability imposes on the individual as related to the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position 
•             How the RA requested will assist the employee in the performance of the essential functions of the position  

In FEMA, the supervisor of record (SOR) is the individual that makes the decision of approving, denying or granting an alternate 
RA, after having an interactive discussion with the employee.  OER staff can participate as facilitators, or neutral parties in the 
interactive discussion, if needed.  The RA Analysts in the Office of Equal Rights (OER) RA Unit assist/facilitate the process.  As the 
RA Analyst for this case, I  will provide advice regarding the law, the policy and procedure and can provide assistance with the 
language of the response to the RA, if needed. If you need further assistance, or have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully, 

Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

35

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Monday, October 15, 2018 1:16 PM
Brathwaite, Winston
FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation
RE: RA Request
Reasonable Accomodation-FEMA Form 256-0-1-08232018.pdf

Previously sent to my supervisor as follows: 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 1:08 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA 
See attached 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:06 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA Request 

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

My name is Winston Brathwaite. I am a Reasonable Accommodation Analyst in the Office of Equal Rights. It has come to my 
attention that you may have recently applied for a reasonable accommodation. If that is the case, I will be the analyst assigned 
to your case. I have attached to this email for your convenience the RA information sheet, and a blank FEMA 256 Form. Once I 
have received these 2 completed forms, I will begin to expeditiously process your request.  

The reasonable accommodation (RA) request process is a confidential one that must not be shared with anyone that does not 
have a need to know.  Besides the supervisor of record (SOR) no other individual should be included or copied in the process, to 

36

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
preserve confidentiality.  The RA process starts with the request of the employee for a reasonable accommodation (RA).  The 
request can be done in any way, verbally, email, letter, etc. The SOR should request that the employee fill out a 256-0-1 form 
(Request for Reasonable Accommodation), attached, indicating what they are requesting as an accommodation, the reason for 
the request and if the request is time sensitive.  The employee must sign and date the request.  When an individual requests an 
RA, there should be an interactive process (meeting) between the SOR and the employee to better understand the employee’s 
request and needs.  If the disability is not obvious (visible), the SOR requests the employee to provide medical documentation to 
support the specific need for the RA requested.  Sufficient medical information provides the following information: 

•             Nature, severity and duration of the disability 
•             What major life activity or activities the disability impairs  
•             How the impairment of the major life activity or activities affects the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position  
•             Limitations that the disability imposes on the individual as related to the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position 
•             How the RA requested will assist the employee in the performance of the essential functions of the position  

In FEMA, the supervisor of record (SOR) is the individual that makes the decision of approving, denying or granting an alternate 
RA, after having an interactive discussion with the employee.  OER staff can participate as facilitators, or neutral parties in the 
interactive discussion, if needed.  The RA Analysts in the Office of Equal Rights (OER) RA Unit assist/facilitate the process.  As the 
RA Analyst for this case, I  will provide advice regarding the law, the policy and procedure and can provide assistance with the 
language of the response to the RA, if needed. If you need further assistance, or have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully, 

Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

37

 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Brathwaite, Winston
Monday, October 15, 2018 1:18 PM
Meindl, Max
FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation
RE: RA Request

Thanks for your response, Mr. Meindl. I will follow up with your supervisor.  

Best,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 2:16 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Previously sent to my supervisor as follows: 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 1:08 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA 
See attached 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:06 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA Request 

38

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

My name is Winston Brathwaite. I am a Reasonable Accommodation Analyst in the Office of Equal Rights. It has come to my 
attention that you may have recently applied for a reasonable accommodation. If that is the case, I will be the analyst assigned 
to your case. I have attached to this email for your convenience the RA information sheet, and a blank FEMA 256 Form. Once I 
have received these 2 completed forms, I will begin to expeditiously process your request.  

The reasonable accommodation (RA) request process is a confidential one that must not be shared with anyone that does not 
have a need to know.  Besides the supervisor of record (SOR) no other individual should be included or copied in the process, to 
preserve confidentiality.  The RA process starts with the request of the employee for a reasonable accommodation (RA).  The 
request can be done in any way, verbally, email, letter, etc. The SOR should request that the employee fill out a 256-0-1 form 
(Request for Reasonable Accommodation), attached, indicating what they are requesting as an accommodation, the reason for 
the request and if the request is time sensitive.  The employee must sign and date the request.  When an individual requests an 
RA, there should be an interactive process (meeting) between the SOR and the employee to better understand the employee’s 
request and needs.  If the disability is not obvious (visible), the SOR requests the employee to provide medical documentation to 
support the specific need for the RA requested.  Sufficient medical information provides the following information: 

•             Nature, severity and duration of the disability 
•             What major life activity or activities the disability impairs  
•             How the impairment of the major life activity or activities affects the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position  
•             Limitations that the disability imposes on the individual as related to the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position 
•             How the RA requested will assist the employee in the performance of the essential functions of the position  

In FEMA, the supervisor of record (SOR) is the individual that makes the decision of approving, denying or granting an alternate 
RA, after having an interactive discussion with the employee.  OER staff can participate as facilitators, or neutral parties in the 
interactive discussion, if needed.  The RA Analysts in the Office of Equal Rights (OER) RA Unit assist/facilitate the process.  As the 
RA Analyst for this case, I  will provide advice regarding the law, the policy and procedure and can provide assistance with the 
language of the response to the RA, if needed. If you need further assistance, or have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully, 

Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

39

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:
Attachments:

FYI 

Meindl, Max
Monday, October 15, 2018 2:02 PM
Brathwaite, Winston
FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation
RE: RA Request
RA INFORMATION SHEET-Vista-Meindl.doc; RA information.pdf; Reasonable Accomodation-FEMA Form 256-0-1-08232018.pdf

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:18 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Thanks for your response, Mr. Meindl. I will follow up with your supervisor.  

Best,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 2:16 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Previously sent to my supervisor as follows: 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 1:08 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA 
See attached 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 

40

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:06 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA Request 

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

My name is Winston Brathwaite. I am a Reasonable Accommodation Analyst in the Office of Equal Rights. It has come to my 
attention that you may have recently applied for a reasonable accommodation. If that is the case, I will be the analyst assigned 
to your case. I have attached to this email for your convenience the RA information sheet, and a blank FEMA 256 Form. Once I 
have received these 2 completed forms, I will begin to expeditiously process your request.  

The reasonable accommodation (RA) request process is a confidential one that must not be shared with anyone that does not 
have a need to know.  Besides the supervisor of record (SOR) no other individual should be included or copied in the process, to 
preserve confidentiality.  The RA process starts with the request of the employee for a reasonable accommodation (RA).  The 
request can be done in any way, verbally, email, letter, etc. The SOR should request that the employee fill out a 256-0-1 form 
(Request for Reasonable Accommodation), attached, indicating what they are requesting as an accommodation, the reason for 
the request and if the request is time sensitive.  The employee must sign and date the request.  When an individual requests an 
RA, there should be an interactive process (meeting) between the SOR and the employee to better understand the employee’s 
request and needs.  If the disability is not obvious (visible), the SOR requests the employee to provide medical documentation to 
support the specific need for the RA requested.  Sufficient medical information provides the following information: 

•             Nature, severity and duration of the disability 
•             What major life activity or activities the disability impairs  
•             How the impairment of the major life activity or activities affects the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position  
•             Limitations that the disability imposes on the individual as related to the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position 
•             How the RA requested will assist the employee in the performance of the essential functions of the position  

In FEMA, the supervisor of record (SOR) is the individual that makes the decision of approving, denying or granting an alternate 
RA, after having an interactive discussion with the employee.  OER staff can participate as facilitators, or neutral parties in the 
interactive discussion, if needed.  The RA Analysts in the Office of Equal Rights (OER) RA Unit assist/facilitate the process.  As the 

41

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RA Analyst for this case, I  will provide advice regarding the law, the policy and procedure and can provide assistance with the 
language of the response to the RA, if needed. If you need further assistance, or have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully, 

Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

42

 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Thank you Mr. Meindl.  

Brathwaite, Winston
Monday, October 15, 2018 2:08 PM
Meindl, Max
FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation; Terry, Detra
RE: RA Request

Ms. Terry, there is no need to request that Mr. Meindl complete the information form any longer. Thank you.  

Best,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 3:02 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

FYI 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:18 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Thanks for your response, Mr. Meindl. I will follow up with your supervisor.  

Best,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 2:16 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 

43

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Previously sent to my supervisor as follows: 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 1:08 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA 
See attached 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:06 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA Request 

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

My name is Winston Brathwaite. I am a Reasonable Accommodation Analyst in the Office of Equal Rights. It has come to my 
attention that you may have recently applied for a reasonable accommodation. If that is the case, I will be the analyst assigned 
to your case. I have attached to this email for your convenience the RA information sheet, and a blank FEMA 256 Form. Once I 
have received these 2 completed forms, I will begin to expeditiously process your request.  

The reasonable accommodation (RA) request process is a confidential one that must not be shared with anyone that does not 
have a need to know.  Besides the supervisor of record (SOR) no other individual should be included or copied in the process, to 
preserve confidentiality.  The RA process starts with the request of the employee for a reasonable accommodation (RA).  The 
request can be done in any way, verbally, email, letter, etc. The SOR should request that the employee fill out a 256-0-1 form 
(Request for Reasonable Accommodation), attached, indicating what they are requesting as an accommodation, the reason for 
the request and if the request is time sensitive.  The employee must sign and date the request.  When an individual requests an 
RA, there should be an interactive process (meeting) between the SOR and the employee to better understand the employee’s 

44

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
request and needs.  If the disability is not obvious (visible), the SOR requests the employee to provide medical documentation to 
support the specific need for the RA requested.  Sufficient medical information provides the following information: 

•             Nature, severity and duration of the disability 
•             What major life activity or activities the disability impairs  
•             How the impairment of the major life activity or activities affects the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position  
•             Limitations that the disability imposes on the individual as related to the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position 
•             How the RA requested will assist the employee in the performance of the essential functions of the position  

In FEMA, the supervisor of record (SOR) is the individual that makes the decision of approving, denying or granting an alternate 
RA, after having an interactive discussion with the employee.  OER staff can participate as facilitators, or neutral parties in the 
interactive discussion, if needed.  The RA Analysts in the Office of Equal Rights (OER) RA Unit assist/facilitate the process.  As the 
RA Analyst for this case, I  will provide advice regarding the law, the policy and procedure and can provide assistance with the 
language of the response to the RA, if needed. If you need further assistance, or have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully, 

Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

45

 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Monday, October 15, 2018 2:10 PM
Brathwaite, Winston
FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation; Terry, Detra
RE: RA Request

10-4, thank you Winston, appreciate your efforts. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 2:08 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Terry, Detra 
<detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Thank you Mr. Meindl.  

Ms. Terry, there is no need to request that Mr. Meindl complete the information form any longer. Thank you.  

Best,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 3:02 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

FYI 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 

46

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:18 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Thanks for your response, Mr. Meindl. I will follow up with your supervisor.  

Best,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 2:16 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Previously sent to my supervisor as follows: 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 1:08 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA 
See attached 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

47

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:06 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA Request 

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

My name is Winston Brathwaite. I am a Reasonable Accommodation Analyst in the Office of Equal Rights. It has come to my 
attention that you may have recently applied for a reasonable accommodation. If that is the case, I will be the analyst assigned 
to your case. I have attached to this email for your convenience the RA information sheet, and a blank FEMA 256 Form. Once I 
have received these 2 completed forms, I will begin to expeditiously process your request.  

The reasonable accommodation (RA) request process is a confidential one that must not be shared with anyone that does not 
have a need to know.  Besides the supervisor of record (SOR) no other individual should be included or copied in the process, to 
preserve confidentiality.  The RA process starts with the request of the employee for a reasonable accommodation (RA).  The 
request can be done in any way, verbally, email, letter, etc. The SOR should request that the employee fill out a 256-0-1 form 
(Request for Reasonable Accommodation), attached, indicating what they are requesting as an accommodation, the reason for 
the request and if the request is time sensitive.  The employee must sign and date the request.  When an individual requests an 
RA, there should be an interactive process (meeting) between the SOR and the employee to better understand the employee’s 
request and needs.  If the disability is not obvious (visible), the SOR requests the employee to provide medical documentation to 
support the specific need for the RA requested.  Sufficient medical information provides the following information: 

•             Nature, severity and duration of the disability 
•             What major life activity or activities the disability impairs  
•             How the impairment of the major life activity or activities affects the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position  
•             Limitations that the disability imposes on the individual as related to the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position 
•             How the RA requested will assist the employee in the performance of the essential functions of the position  

In FEMA, the supervisor of record (SOR) is the individual that makes the decision of approving, denying or granting an alternate 
RA, after having an interactive discussion with the employee.  OER staff can participate as facilitators, or neutral parties in the 
interactive discussion, if needed.  The RA Analysts in the Office of Equal Rights (OER) RA Unit assist/facilitate the process.  As the 
RA Analyst for this case, I  will provide advice regarding the law, the policy and procedure and can provide assistance with the 
language of the response to the RA, if needed. If you need further assistance, or have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully, 

Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 

48

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

49

 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Sunday, October 21, 2018 2:43 PM
femamax@gmail.com
Fwd: Reasonable Accommodation Request

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Merritt, Lisa 
Sent: Thursday, October 4, 2018 1:23:25 PM 
To: Meindl, Max 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation Request  

Ok, I’m just making sure I can answer any questions you may have. The note needs to be very descriptive and provide all 
information that I sent to you in bullet points. 

Thank you, 

Lisa Merritt|Asst. Reservist Program Manager 
Public Assistance Division 
Field Support Branch 
FEMA | HQ 
202-212-2524 | lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov  
FEMA-PA-Reservist-Program@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, October 4, 2018 2:16 PM 
To: Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation Request 

I have to meet with a cardiologist to obtain requested paperwork. 
The VA does not seem to be interested in putting anything in writing so I am having to see a provider outside the VA system. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

50

 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
From: Merritt, Lisa  
Sent: Thursday, October 4, 2018 1:12 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation Request 

Hello Max, 

I reached out last week and left another voicemail. Do you have any questions about the RA process? Anything we need to go 
over together? 

Thank you, 

Lisa Merritt|Asst. Reservist Program Manager 
Public Assistance Division 
Field Support Branch 
FEMA | HQ 
202-212-2524 | lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov  
FEMA-PA-Reservist-Program@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Merritt, Lisa  
Sent: Wednesday, September 26, 2018 1:29 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation Request 

Hello Max, 

I wanted to follow up on your reasonable accommodation. Please give me a call, so I can answer any questions you may have. 

Thank you, 

Lisa Merritt|Asst. Reservist Program Manager 
Public Assistance Division 
Field Support Branch 
FEMA | HQ 
202-212-2524 | lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov  
FEMA-PA-Reservist-Program@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Merritt, Lisa  
Sent: Monday, September 17, 2018 3:11 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation Request 
Importance: High 

Hello Max, 

I have received your 256 Reasonable Accommodation Request Form. In addition, we will need supporting 
documentation from your health care provider (on letterhead) to provide to Office of Equal Rights. Below is 
the information that should be included in the letter for a reasonable accommodation request: 

51

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  The nature, severity, or duration of your impairment/disability 
  The extent to which the impairment/disability limits your ability to perform your job 
  Why you require the particular Reasonable Accommodation (what tools do you need to do your job 

i.e. chair, vehicle upgrade / please be very specific) 

  How the accommodation you requested will assist you in performing the essential functions of the job 

Please give me a call, so we can discuss. 

Thank you, 

Cadre Management Team 
Public Assistance Division 
Field Support Branch 
FEMA/HQ 
Reservists Line: 202-212-1028 
FEMA-PA-Reservist-Program@fema.dhs.gov 

52

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, October 24, 2018 10:57 AM
Brathwaite, Winston
RE: RA Request
2018_10_24_10_52_27.pdf; RA information.pdf

Winston, 
Appreciate your correspondence and assistance. 
Documents attached. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:06 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA Request 

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

My name is Winston Brathwaite. I am a Reasonable Accommodation Analyst in the Office of Equal Rights. It has come to my 
attention that you may have recently applied for a reasonable accommodation. If that is the case, I will be the analyst assigned 
to your case. I have attached to this email for your convenience the RA information sheet, and a blank FEMA 256 Form. Once I 
have received these 2 completed forms, I will begin to expeditiously process your request.  

The reasonable accommodation (RA) request process is a confidential one that must not be shared with anyone that does not 
have a need to know.  Besides the supervisor of record (SOR) no other individual should be included or copied in the process, to 
preserve confidentiality.  The RA process starts with the request of the employee for a reasonable accommodation (RA).  The 
request can be done in any way, verbally, email, letter, etc. The SOR should request that the employee fill out a 256-0-1 form 
(Request for Reasonable Accommodation), attached, indicating what they are requesting as an accommodation, the reason for 
the request and if the request is time sensitive.  The employee must sign and date the request.  When an individual requests an 
RA, there should be an interactive process (meeting) between the SOR and the employee to better understand the employee’s 
request and needs.  If the disability is not obvious (visible), the SOR requests the employee to provide medical documentation to 
support the specific need for the RA requested.  Sufficient medical information provides the following information: 

•             Nature, severity and duration of the disability 
•             What major life activity or activities the disability impairs  

53

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•             How the impairment of the major life activity or activities affects the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position  
•             Limitations that the disability imposes on the individual as related to the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position 
•             How the RA requested will assist the employee in the performance of the essential functions of the position  

In FEMA, the supervisor of record (SOR) is the individual that makes the decision of approving, denying or granting an alternate 
RA, after having an interactive discussion with the employee.  OER staff can participate as facilitators, or neutral parties in the 
interactive discussion, if needed.  The RA Analysts in the Office of Equal Rights (OER) RA Unit assist/facilitate the process.  As the 
RA Analyst for this case, I  will provide advice regarding the law, the policy and procedure and can provide assistance with the 
language of the response to the RA, if needed. If you need further assistance, or have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully, 

Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

54

 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:
Attachments:

Thank you, Mr. Meindl: 

Brathwaite, Winston
Wednesday, October 24, 2018 11:13 AM
Meindl, Max
Terry, Detra
RE: RA Request
blank FEMA Form 256-0-1.pdf

Did you fill out the 256 Form as well? I don’t see one for you on file. I have attached it to this email for your convenience. Also, 
for future reference, due to the confidential nature of the RA process, when sending medical documents, please password 
protect them. Once I receive the completed 256 Form, I will begin processing your request. Have a great day.  

Respectfully,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, October 24, 2018 11:57 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Winston, 
Appreciate your correspondence and assistance. 
Documents attached. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:06 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA Request 

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

My name is Winston Brathwaite. I am a Reasonable Accommodation Analyst in the Office of Equal Rights. It has come to my 
attention that you may have recently applied for a reasonable accommodation. If that is the case, I will be the analyst assigned 

55

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to your case. I have attached to this email for your convenience the RA information sheet, and a blank FEMA 256 Form. Once I 
have received these 2 completed forms, I will begin to expeditiously process your request.  

The reasonable accommodation (RA) request process is a confidential one that must not be shared with anyone that does not 
have a need to know.  Besides the supervisor of record (SOR) no other individual should be included or copied in the process, to 
preserve confidentiality.  The RA process starts with the request of the employee for a reasonable accommodation (RA).  The 
request can be done in any way, verbally, email, letter, etc. The SOR should request that the employee fill out a 256-0-1 form 
(Request for Reasonable Accommodation), attached, indicating what they are requesting as an accommodation, the reason for 
the request and if the request is time sensitive.  The employee must sign and date the request.  When an individual requests an 
RA, there should be an interactive process (meeting) between the SOR and the employee to better understand the employee’s 
request and needs.  If the disability is not obvious (visible), the SOR requests the employee to provide medical documentation to 
support the specific need for the RA requested.  Sufficient medical information provides the following information: 

•             Nature, severity and duration of the disability 
•             What major life activity or activities the disability impairs  
•             How the impairment of the major life activity or activities affects the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position  
•             Limitations that the disability imposes on the individual as related to the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position 
•             How the RA requested will assist the employee in the performance of the essential functions of the position  

In FEMA, the supervisor of record (SOR) is the individual that makes the decision of approving, denying or granting an alternate 
RA, after having an interactive discussion with the employee.  OER staff can participate as facilitators, or neutral parties in the 
interactive discussion, if needed.  The RA Analysts in the Office of Equal Rights (OER) RA Unit assist/facilitate the process.  As the 
RA Analyst for this case, I  will provide advice regarding the law, the policy and procedure and can provide assistance with the 
language of the response to the RA, if needed. If you need further assistance, or have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully, 

Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

56

 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Thursday, October 25, 2018 8:43 AM
Brathwaite, Winston
RE: RA Request
Dr. Gay.pdf

It is included as page 2 and 3 of behind the doctors letter (2018-10-24-10-52-27 file), I’ve included it again for you. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Wednesday, October 24, 2018 11:13 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Thank you, Mr. Meindl: 

Did you fill out the 256 Form as well? I don’t see one for you on file. I have attached it to this email for your convenience. Also, 
for future reference, due to the confidential nature of the RA process, when sending medical documents, please password 
protect them. Once I receive the completed 256 Form, I will begin processing your request. Have a great day.  

Respectfully,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, October 24, 2018 11:57 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Winston, 
Appreciate your correspondence and assistance. 
Documents attached. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 

57

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:06 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA Request 

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

My name is Winston Brathwaite. I am a Reasonable Accommodation Analyst in the Office of Equal Rights. It has come to my 
attention that you may have recently applied for a reasonable accommodation. If that is the case, I will be the analyst assigned 
to your case. I have attached to this email for your convenience the RA information sheet, and a blank FEMA 256 Form. Once I 
have received these 2 completed forms, I will begin to expeditiously process your request.  

The reasonable accommodation (RA) request process is a confidential one that must not be shared with anyone that does not 
have a need to know.  Besides the supervisor of record (SOR) no other individual should be included or copied in the process, to 
preserve confidentiality.  The RA process starts with the request of the employee for a reasonable accommodation (RA).  The 
request can be done in any way, verbally, email, letter, etc. The SOR should request that the employee fill out a 256-0-1 form 
(Request for Reasonable Accommodation), attached, indicating what they are requesting as an accommodation, the reason for 
the request and if the request is time sensitive.  The employee must sign and date the request.  When an individual requests an 
RA, there should be an interactive process (meeting) between the SOR and the employee to better understand the employee’s 
request and needs.  If the disability is not obvious (visible), the SOR requests the employee to provide medical documentation to 
support the specific need for the RA requested.  Sufficient medical information provides the following information: 

•             Nature, severity and duration of the disability 
•             What major life activity or activities the disability impairs  
•             How the impairment of the major life activity or activities affects the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position  
•             Limitations that the disability imposes on the individual as related to the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position 
•             How the RA requested will assist the employee in the performance of the essential functions of the position  

In FEMA, the supervisor of record (SOR) is the individual that makes the decision of approving, denying or granting an alternate 
RA, after having an interactive discussion with the employee.  OER staff can participate as facilitators, or neutral parties in the 
interactive discussion, if needed.  The RA Analysts in the Office of Equal Rights (OER) RA Unit assist/facilitate the process.  As the 
RA Analyst for this case, I  will provide advice regarding the law, the policy and procedure and can provide assistance with the 
language of the response to the RA, if needed. If you need further assistance, or have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully, 

Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 

58

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

59

 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Thursday, October 25, 2018 8:44 AM
Brathwaite, Winston
RE: RA Request
Reasonable Accomodation-FEMA Form 256-0-1-08232018-10252018.pdf

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Wednesday, October 24, 2018 11:13 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Thank you, Mr. Meindl: 

Did you fill out the 256 Form as well? I don’t see one for you on file. I have attached it to this email for your convenience. Also, 
for future reference, due to the confidential nature of the RA process, when sending medical documents, please password 
protect them. Once I receive the completed 256 Form, I will begin processing your request. Have a great day.  

Respectfully,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, October 24, 2018 11:57 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Winston, 
Appreciate your correspondence and assistance. 
Documents attached. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 

60

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:06 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA Request 

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

My name is Winston Brathwaite. I am a Reasonable Accommodation Analyst in the Office of Equal Rights. It has come to my 
attention that you may have recently applied for a reasonable accommodation. If that is the case, I will be the analyst assigned 
to your case. I have attached to this email for your convenience the RA information sheet, and a blank FEMA 256 Form. Once I 
have received these 2 completed forms, I will begin to expeditiously process your request.  

The reasonable accommodation (RA) request process is a confidential one that must not be shared with anyone that does not 
have a need to know.  Besides the supervisor of record (SOR) no other individual should be included or copied in the process, to 
preserve confidentiality.  The RA process starts with the request of the employee for a reasonable accommodation (RA).  The 
request can be done in any way, verbally, email, letter, etc. The SOR should request that the employee fill out a 256-0-1 form 
(Request for Reasonable Accommodation), attached, indicating what they are requesting as an accommodation, the reason for 
the request and if the request is time sensitive.  The employee must sign and date the request.  When an individual requests an 
RA, there should be an interactive process (meeting) between the SOR and the employee to better understand the employee’s 
request and needs.  If the disability is not obvious (visible), the SOR requests the employee to provide medical documentation to 
support the specific need for the RA requested.  Sufficient medical information provides the following information: 

•             Nature, severity and duration of the disability 
•             What major life activity or activities the disability impairs  
•             How the impairment of the major life activity or activities affects the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position  
•             Limitations that the disability imposes on the individual as related to the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position 
•             How the RA requested will assist the employee in the performance of the essential functions of the position  

In FEMA, the supervisor of record (SOR) is the individual that makes the decision of approving, denying or granting an alternate 
RA, after having an interactive discussion with the employee.  OER staff can participate as facilitators, or neutral parties in the 
interactive discussion, if needed.  The RA Analysts in the Office of Equal Rights (OER) RA Unit assist/facilitate the process.  As the 
RA Analyst for this case, I  will provide advice regarding the law, the policy and procedure and can provide assistance with the 
language of the response to the RA, if needed. If you need further assistance, or have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully, 

Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 

61

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

62

 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Thursday, October 25, 2018 8:45 AM
Brathwaite, Winston
FW: RA Request
RA INFORMATION SHEET-Vista-Meindl.doc; RA information.pdf; Reasonable Accomodation-FEMA Form 256-0-1-08232018.pdf

I sent this email to you on the 15th . 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 2:02 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

FYI 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:18 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 

63

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Thanks for your response, Mr. Meindl. I will follow up with your supervisor.  

Best,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 2:16 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Previously sent to my supervisor as follows: 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 1:08 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA 
See attached 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:06 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA Request 

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

My name is Winston Brathwaite. I am a Reasonable Accommodation Analyst in the Office of Equal Rights. It has come to my 
attention that you may have recently applied for a reasonable accommodation. If that is the case, I will be the analyst assigned 

64

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to your case. I have attached to this email for your convenience the RA information sheet, and a blank FEMA 256 Form. Once I 
have received these 2 completed forms, I will begin to expeditiously process your request.  

The reasonable accommodation (RA) request process is a confidential one that must not be shared with anyone that does not 
have a need to know.  Besides the supervisor of record (SOR) no other individual should be included or copied in the process, to 
preserve confidentiality.  The RA process starts with the request of the employee for a reasonable accommodation (RA).  The 
request can be done in any way, verbally, email, letter, etc. The SOR should request that the employee fill out a 256-0-1 form 
(Request for Reasonable Accommodation), attached, indicating what they are requesting as an accommodation, the reason for 
the request and if the request is time sensitive.  The employee must sign and date the request.  When an individual requests an 
RA, there should be an interactive process (meeting) between the SOR and the employee to better understand the employee’s 
request and needs.  If the disability is not obvious (visible), the SOR requests the employee to provide medical documentation to 
support the specific need for the RA requested.  Sufficient medical information provides the following information: 

•             Nature, severity and duration of the disability 
•             What major life activity or activities the disability impairs  
•             How the impairment of the major life activity or activities affects the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position  
•             Limitations that the disability imposes on the individual as related to the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position 
•             How the RA requested will assist the employee in the performance of the essential functions of the position  

In FEMA, the supervisor of record (SOR) is the individual that makes the decision of approving, denying or granting an alternate 
RA, after having an interactive discussion with the employee.  OER staff can participate as facilitators, or neutral parties in the 
interactive discussion, if needed.  The RA Analysts in the Office of Equal Rights (OER) RA Unit assist/facilitate the process.  As the 
RA Analyst for this case, I  will provide advice regarding the law, the policy and procedure and can provide assistance with the 
language of the response to the RA, if needed. If you need further assistance, or have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully, 

Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

65

 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Thursday, October 25, 2018 9:28 AM
Brathwaite, Winston
RE: RA Request

Winston, 
Forgot to thank you for your efforts. 
Have a wonderful day…. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Wednesday, October 24, 2018 11:13 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Thank you, Mr. Meindl: 

Did you fill out the 256 Form as well? I don’t see one for you on file. I have attached it to this email for your convenience. Also, 
for future reference, due to the confidential nature of the RA process, when sending medical documents, please password 
protect them. Once I receive the completed 256 Form, I will begin processing your request. Have a great day.  

Respectfully,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, October 24, 2018 11:57 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Winston, 
Appreciate your correspondence and assistance. 
Documents attached. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 

66

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:06 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA Request 

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

My name is Winston Brathwaite. I am a Reasonable Accommodation Analyst in the Office of Equal Rights. It has come to my 
attention that you may have recently applied for a reasonable accommodation. If that is the case, I will be the analyst assigned 
to your case. I have attached to this email for your convenience the RA information sheet, and a blank FEMA 256 Form. Once I 
have received these 2 completed forms, I will begin to expeditiously process your request.  

The reasonable accommodation (RA) request process is a confidential one that must not be shared with anyone that does not 
have a need to know.  Besides the supervisor of record (SOR) no other individual should be included or copied in the process, to 
preserve confidentiality.  The RA process starts with the request of the employee for a reasonable accommodation (RA).  The 
request can be done in any way, verbally, email, letter, etc. The SOR should request that the employee fill out a 256-0-1 form 
(Request for Reasonable Accommodation), attached, indicating what they are requesting as an accommodation, the reason for 
the request and if the request is time sensitive.  The employee must sign and date the request.  When an individual requests an 
RA, there should be an interactive process (meeting) between the SOR and the employee to better understand the employee’s 
request and needs.  If the disability is not obvious (visible), the SOR requests the employee to provide medical documentation to 
support the specific need for the RA requested.  Sufficient medical information provides the following information: 

•             Nature, severity and duration of the disability 
•             What major life activity or activities the disability impairs  
•             How the impairment of the major life activity or activities affects the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position  
•             Limitations that the disability imposes on the individual as related to the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position 
•             How the RA requested will assist the employee in the performance of the essential functions of the position  

In FEMA, the supervisor of record (SOR) is the individual that makes the decision of approving, denying or granting an alternate 
RA, after having an interactive discussion with the employee.  OER staff can participate as facilitators, or neutral parties in the 
interactive discussion, if needed.  The RA Analysts in the Office of Equal Rights (OER) RA Unit assist/facilitate the process.  As the 
RA Analyst for this case, I  will provide advice regarding the law, the policy and procedure and can provide assistance with the 
language of the response to the RA, if needed. If you need further assistance, or have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully, 

67

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

68

 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Brathwaite, Winston
Thursday, October 25, 2018 9:33 AM
Meindl, Max
RE: RA Request

Thank you Max. Have these been sent to your SOR, Ms. Detra Terry? 

Best,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, October 25, 2018 10:28 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Winston, 
Forgot to thank you for your efforts. 
Have a wonderful day…. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Wednesday, October 24, 2018 11:13 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Thank you, Mr. Meindl: 

Did you fill out the 256 Form as well? I don’t see one for you on file. I have attached it to this email for your convenience. Also, 
for future reference, due to the confidential nature of the RA process, when sending medical documents, please password 
protect them. Once I receive the completed 256 Form, I will begin processing your request. Have a great day.  

Respectfully,  
Winston 

69

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, October 24, 2018 11:57 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Winston, 
Appreciate your correspondence and assistance. 
Documents attached. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:06 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA Request 

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

My name is Winston Brathwaite. I am a Reasonable Accommodation Analyst in the Office of Equal Rights. It has come to my 
attention that you may have recently applied for a reasonable accommodation. If that is the case, I will be the analyst assigned 
to your case. I have attached to this email for your convenience the RA information sheet, and a blank FEMA 256 Form. Once I 
have received these 2 completed forms, I will begin to expeditiously process your request.  

The reasonable accommodation (RA) request process is a confidential one that must not be shared with anyone that does not 
have a need to know.  Besides the supervisor of record (SOR) no other individual should be included or copied in the process, to 
preserve confidentiality.  The RA process starts with the request of the employee for a reasonable accommodation (RA).  The 
request can be done in any way, verbally, email, letter, etc. The SOR should request that the employee fill out a 256-0-1 form 
(Request for Reasonable Accommodation), attached, indicating what they are requesting as an accommodation, the reason for 
the request and if the request is time sensitive.  The employee must sign and date the request.  When an individual requests an 
RA, there should be an interactive process (meeting) between the SOR and the employee to better understand the employee’s 
request and needs.  If the disability is not obvious (visible), the SOR requests the employee to provide medical documentation to 
support the specific need for the RA requested.  Sufficient medical information provides the following information: 

•             Nature, severity and duration of the disability 
•             What major life activity or activities the disability impairs  
•             How the impairment of the major life activity or activities affects the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position  
•             Limitations that the disability imposes on the individual as related to the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position 

70

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•             How the RA requested will assist the employee in the performance of the essential functions of the position  

In FEMA, the supervisor of record (SOR) is the individual that makes the decision of approving, denying or granting an alternate 
RA, after having an interactive discussion with the employee.  OER staff can participate as facilitators, or neutral parties in the 
interactive discussion, if needed.  The RA Analysts in the Office of Equal Rights (OER) RA Unit assist/facilitate the process.  As the 
RA Analyst for this case, I  will provide advice regarding the law, the policy and procedure and can provide assistance with the 
language of the response to the RA, if needed. If you need further assistance, or have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully, 

Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

71

 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Thursday, October 25, 2018 10:35 AM
Brathwaite, Winston
RE: RA Request

At this time, just to you Winston. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, October 25, 2018 9:33 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Thank you Max. Have these been sent to your SOR, Ms. Detra Terry? 

Best,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, October 25, 2018 10:28 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Winston, 
Forgot to thank you for your efforts. 
Have a wonderful day…. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

72

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Wednesday, October 24, 2018 11:13 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Thank you, Mr. Meindl: 

Did you fill out the 256 Form as well? I don’t see one for you on file. I have attached it to this email for your convenience. Also, 
for future reference, due to the confidential nature of the RA process, when sending medical documents, please password 
protect them. Once I receive the completed 256 Form, I will begin processing your request. Have a great day.  

Respectfully,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, October 24, 2018 11:57 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Winston, 
Appreciate your correspondence and assistance. 
Documents attached. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:06 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 

73

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA Request 

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

My name is Winston Brathwaite. I am a Reasonable Accommodation Analyst in the Office of Equal Rights. It has come to my 
attention that you may have recently applied for a reasonable accommodation. If that is the case, I will be the analyst assigned 
to your case. I have attached to this email for your convenience the RA information sheet, and a blank FEMA 256 Form. Once I 
have received these 2 completed forms, I will begin to expeditiously process your request.  

The reasonable accommodation (RA) request process is a confidential one that must not be shared with anyone that does not 
have a need to know.  Besides the supervisor of record (SOR) no other individual should be included or copied in the process, to 
preserve confidentiality.  The RA process starts with the request of the employee for a reasonable accommodation (RA).  The 
request can be done in any way, verbally, email, letter, etc. The SOR should request that the employee fill out a 256-0-1 form 
(Request for Reasonable Accommodation), attached, indicating what they are requesting as an accommodation, the reason for 
the request and if the request is time sensitive.  The employee must sign and date the request.  When an individual requests an 
RA, there should be an interactive process (meeting) between the SOR and the employee to better understand the employee’s 
request and needs.  If the disability is not obvious (visible), the SOR requests the employee to provide medical documentation to 
support the specific need for the RA requested.  Sufficient medical information provides the following information: 

•             Nature, severity and duration of the disability 
•             What major life activity or activities the disability impairs  
•             How the impairment of the major life activity or activities affects the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position  
•             Limitations that the disability imposes on the individual as related to the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position 
•             How the RA requested will assist the employee in the performance of the essential functions of the position  

In FEMA, the supervisor of record (SOR) is the individual that makes the decision of approving, denying or granting an alternate 
RA, after having an interactive discussion with the employee.  OER staff can participate as facilitators, or neutral parties in the 
interactive discussion, if needed.  The RA Analysts in the Office of Equal Rights (OER) RA Unit assist/facilitate the process.  As the 
RA Analyst for this case, I  will provide advice regarding the law, the policy and procedure and can provide assistance with the 
language of the response to the RA, if needed. If you need further assistance, or have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully, 

Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

74

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Thursday, October 25, 2018 4:39 PM
TERRY, DETRA S.
FW: RA Request
Reasonable Accomodation-FEMA Form 256-0-1-08232018-10252018.pdf

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, October 25, 2018 8:43 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Wednesday, October 24, 2018 11:13 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 

75

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cc: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Thank you, Mr. Meindl: 

Did you fill out the 256 Form as well? I don’t see one for you on file. I have attached it to this email for your convenience. Also, 
for future reference, due to the confidential nature of the RA process, when sending medical documents, please password 
protect them. Once I receive the completed 256 Form, I will begin processing your request. Have a great day.  

Respectfully,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, October 24, 2018 11:57 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Winston, 
Appreciate your correspondence and assistance. 
Documents attached. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:06 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA Request 

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

My name is Winston Brathwaite. I am a Reasonable Accommodation Analyst in the Office of Equal Rights. It has come to my 
attention that you may have recently applied for a reasonable accommodation. If that is the case, I will be the analyst assigned 
to your case. I have attached to this email for your convenience the RA information sheet, and a blank FEMA 256 Form. Once I 
have received these 2 completed forms, I will begin to expeditiously process your request.  

The reasonable accommodation (RA) request process is a confidential one that must not be shared with anyone that does not 
have a need to know.  Besides the supervisor of record (SOR) no other individual should be included or copied in the process, to 
preserve confidentiality.  The RA process starts with the request of the employee for a reasonable accommodation (RA).  The 
request can be done in any way, verbally, email, letter, etc. The SOR should request that the employee fill out a 256-0-1 form 

76

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Request for Reasonable Accommodation), attached, indicating what they are requesting as an accommodation, the reason for 
the request and if the request is time sensitive.  The employee must sign and date the request.  When an individual requests an 
RA, there should be an interactive process (meeting) between the SOR and the employee to better understand the employee’s 
request and needs.  If the disability is not obvious (visible), the SOR requests the employee to provide medical documentation to 
support the specific need for the RA requested.  Sufficient medical information provides the following information: 

•             Nature, severity and duration of the disability 
•             What major life activity or activities the disability impairs  
•             How the impairment of the major life activity or activities affects the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position  
•             Limitations that the disability imposes on the individual as related to the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position 
•             How the RA requested will assist the employee in the performance of the essential functions of the position  

In FEMA, the supervisor of record (SOR) is the individual that makes the decision of approving, denying or granting an alternate 
RA, after having an interactive discussion with the employee.  OER staff can participate as facilitators, or neutral parties in the 
interactive discussion, if needed.  The RA Analysts in the Office of Equal Rights (OER) RA Unit assist/facilitate the process.  As the 
RA Analyst for this case, I  will provide advice regarding the law, the policy and procedure and can provide assistance with the 
language of the response to the RA, if needed. If you need further assistance, or have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully, 

Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

77

 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, November 7, 2018 4:10 PM
Brathwaite, Winston; Merritt, Lisa; Henri, Foudiya; Goudy, Douglas
FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation; Asaro, Karen; TERRY, DETRA S.; femamax@gmail.com
RE: RA Request

Winston, 
I was just advised by my TFL (Detra Terry) that you were going to be closing my RA request and that I could open a new case. 
That is not acceptable to me. 
I filed my initial RA on AUGUST 23rd 2018 and here we are on November 7th , 2018 with no resolution nor response. 
I find that a tad unacceptable and would like to inquire as to why my request cannot be handled in a timely manner, approved or 
denied. 
According to policy: 
FEMA Manual 1430.1 Chg.1 December 3, 2002 
4-4 
Chapter 5 
Time Frames 
5-1. Processing Requests. FEMA will process requests for reasonable accommodation and provide accommodations, where they are appropriate, 
in as short a time frame as reasonably possible. FEMA recognizes, however, that the time necessary to process a request will depend on the 
nature of the accommodation requested and whether it is necessary to obtain supporting information. Time frames for processing requests and 
providing reasonable accommodation where no supporting information is required are as follows: 
a. Requests from applicants for employment should be expedited when necessary to ensure the applicant’s ability to compete for the position. 
However, these requests should not exceed ten (10) business days. 
b. If a request from an employee is processed by the supervisor, the request should be processed, and the accommodation, if granted, provided 
within 15 business days from the date of receipt of the request. Requests for accommodation should be expedited when the accommodation is 
needed to enable the employee to participate in an Agency activity scheduled to occur in the near future. 
(1) If the decision maker believes that it is necessary to obtain medical information to determine whether the requesting individual has a 
disability and/or to identify the functional limitations, the decision maker will request the information as soon as possible after his or her receipt 
of the request for accommodation. FEMA recognizes that the need for documentation may not become apparent until after the interactive 
process has begun. 
(2) In cases where medical documentation is needed, the accommodation, if granted, will be provided within ten (10) business days for an 
applicant, and within 15 business days for an employee, from the date the decision maker receives the relevant information, absent any 
extenuating circumstances. 
c. Where the Disability Program Manager is the decision maker on a request for reasonable accommodation, he/she will make a decision on the 
request and the  accommodation, if granted, will be provided within 15 business days from the date of the request. If medical documentation is 
necessary, the decision will be made within 15 business days of receipt of the medical information, absent any extenuating circumstances. 

All requested appropriate documentation has been provided as requested including my doctors statement. 
Please advise soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

78

 
 
From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:06 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA Request 

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

My name is Winston Brathwaite. I am a Reasonable Accommodation Analyst in the Office of Equal Rights. It has come to my 
attention that you may have recently applied for a reasonable accommodation. If that is the case, I will be the analyst assigned 
to your case. I have attached to this email for your convenience the RA information sheet, and a blank FEMA 256 Form. Once I 
have received these 2 completed forms, I will begin to expeditiously process your request.  

The reasonable accommodation (RA) request process is a confidential one that must not be shared with anyone that does not 
have a need to know.  Besides the supervisor of record (SOR) no other individual should be included or copied in the process, to 
preserve confidentiality.  The RA process starts with the request of the employee for a reasonable accommodation (RA).  The 
request can be done in any way, verbally, email, letter, etc. The SOR should request that the employee fill out a 256-0-1 form 
(Request for Reasonable Accommodation), attached, indicating what they are requesting as an accommodation, the reason for 
the request and if the request is time sensitive.  The employee must sign and date the request.  When an individual requests an 
RA, there should be an interactive process (meeting) between the SOR and the employee to better understand the employee’s 
request and needs.  If the disability is not obvious (visible), the SOR requests the employee to provide medical documentation to 
support the specific need for the RA requested.  Sufficient medical information provides the following information: 

•             Nature, severity and duration of the disability 
•             What major life activity or activities the disability impairs  
•             How the impairment of the major life activity or activities affects the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position  
•             Limitations that the disability imposes on the individual as related to the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position 
•             How the RA requested will assist the employee in the performance of the essential functions of the position  

In FEMA, the supervisor of record (SOR) is the individual that makes the decision of approving, denying or granting an alternate 
RA, after having an interactive discussion with the employee.  OER staff can participate as facilitators, or neutral parties in the 
interactive discussion, if needed.  The RA Analysts in the Office of Equal Rights (OER) RA Unit assist/facilitate the process.  As the 
RA Analyst for this case, I  will provide advice regarding the law, the policy and procedure and can provide assistance with the 
language of the response to the RA, if needed. If you need further assistance, or have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully, 

Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

79

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

Brathwaite, Winston
Thursday, November 8, 2018 6:47 AM
Meindl, Max
Terry, Detra
FW: RA Request

Please see the email string below. Supervisors of Record have 30 days within which to render a decision on a reasonable 
accommodation request. As you mentioned in your email to me, your request was submitted in August. It is now going on 
almost 120 days with no decision rendered. We cannot allow this case to languish any further. If the SOR is prepared to render a 
decision the case can be processed and closed. If not, the case will be closed until the SOR is prepared to render a decision. I 
hope this helps.  

Respectfully,  
Winston 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Wednesday, November 7, 2018 12:10 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: RA Request 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Wednesday, November 7, 2018 12:06 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Greetings, Ms. Terry. I have not heard anything back. I will therefore close this case. If you are the employee want to proceed, a 
new case can be opened. Thank you.  

Respectfully,  
Winston 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Wednesday, October 31, 2018 11:03 AM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Greetings, Ms. Terry:  

Following up on the below e-mail. Please let me know the status. Thank you.  

Regards,  
Winston 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, October 25, 2018 2:44 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: RA Request 

80

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Greetings, Ms. Terry: 

Here are the RA documents you will need to review in order to make the determination to grant or deny Mr. Max Meindl’s 
reasonable accommodation request. As the SOR, you are the deciding official. Page 2 of the 256 form should be completed by 
you. Please indicate in box #2 if the request is approved or denied. In box #16, please provide an explanation of what is being 
granted, why  it is being granted, and for what period of time. If you have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, October 25, 2018 9:45 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: RA Request 

I sent this email to you on the 15th . 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 2:02 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

FYI 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

81

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:18 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Thanks for your response, Mr. Meindl. I will follow up with your supervisor.  

Best,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 2:16 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Previously sent to my supervisor as follows: 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 1:08 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA 
See attached 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

82

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:06 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA Request 

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

My name is Winston Brathwaite. I am a Reasonable Accommodation Analyst in the Office of Equal Rights. It has come to my 
attention that you may have recently applied for a reasonable accommodation. If that is the case, I will be the analyst assigned 
to your case. I have attached to this email for your convenience the RA information sheet, and a blank FEMA 256 Form. Once I 
have received these 2 completed forms, I will begin to expeditiously process your request.  

The reasonable accommodation (RA) request process is a confidential one that must not be shared with anyone that does not 
have a need to know.  Besides the supervisor of record (SOR) no other individual should be included or copied in the process, to 
preserve confidentiality.  The RA process starts with the request of the employee for a reasonable accommodation (RA).  The 
request can be done in any way, verbally, email, letter, etc. The SOR should request that the employee fill out a 256-0-1 form 
(Request for Reasonable Accommodation), attached, indicating what they are requesting as an accommodation, the reason for 
the request and if the request is time sensitive.  The employee must sign and date the request.  When an individual requests an 
RA, there should be an interactive process (meeting) between the SOR and the employee to better understand the employee’s 
request and needs.  If the disability is not obvious (visible), the SOR requests the employee to provide medical documentation to 
support the specific need for the RA requested.  Sufficient medical information provides the following information: 

•             Nature, severity and duration of the disability 
•             What major life activity or activities the disability impairs  
•             How the impairment of the major life activity or activities affects the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position  
•             Limitations that the disability imposes on the individual as related to the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position 
•             How the RA requested will assist the employee in the performance of the essential functions of the position  

In FEMA, the supervisor of record (SOR) is the individual that makes the decision of approving, denying or granting an alternate 
RA, after having an interactive discussion with the employee.  OER staff can participate as facilitators, or neutral parties in the 
interactive discussion, if needed.  The RA Analysts in the Office of Equal Rights (OER) RA Unit assist/facilitate the process.  As the 
RA Analyst for this case, I  will provide advice regarding the law, the policy and procedure and can provide assistance with the 
language of the response to the RA, if needed. If you need further assistance, or have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully, 

Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

83

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Good morning Max, 

Merritt, Lisa
Thursday, November 8, 2018 6:51 AM
Meindl, Max; Brathwaite, Winston; Henri, Foudiya
RE: RA Request

I spoke with you several weeks ago and discussed that we received your RA Request Form, but no 
healthcare documentation. At that time, you said you would need to meet with a cardiologist to obtain 
requested paperwork. We are more than happy to assist you with the process. Will you be able to provide 
documentation shortly? Would you like to have another discussion as to what is required in the physician’s 
note? I believe you are requesting a reasonable accommodation to telework. Have you spoke with field 
leadership and Equal Rights to see if they can accommodate this request and work from an alternative 
location? 

Thank you, 

Lisa Merritt|Asst. Reservist Program Manager 
Public Assistance Division 
Field Support Branch 
FEMA | HQ 
202-212-2524 | lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov  
FEMA-PA-Reservist-Program@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, November 7, 2018 5:10 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya 
<Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas <Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Asaro, Karen 
<Karen.Asaro@fema.dhs.gov>; Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov>; femamax@gmail.com 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Winston, 
I was just advised by my TFL (Detra Terry) that you were going to be closing my RA request and that I could open a new case. 
That is not acceptable to me. 
I filed my initial RA on AUGUST 23rd 2018 and here we are on November 7th , 2018 with no resolution nor response. 
I find that a tad unacceptable and would like to inquire as to why my request cannot be handled in a timely manner, approved or 
denied. 
According to policy: 
FEMA Manual 1430.1 Chg.1 December 3, 2002 
4-4 
Chapter 5 
Time Frames 
5-1. Processing Requests. FEMA will process requests for reasonable accommodation and provide accommodations, where they are appropriate, 
in as short a time frame as reasonably possible. FEMA recognizes, however, that the time necessary to process a request will depend on the 
nature of the accommodation requested and whether it is necessary to obtain supporting information. Time frames for processing requests and 
providing reasonable accommodation where no supporting information is required are as follows: 
a. Requests from applicants for employment should be expedited when necessary to ensure the applicant’s ability to compete for the position. 
However, these requests should not exceed ten (10) business days. 

84

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
b. If a request from an employee is processed by the supervisor, the request should be processed, and the accommodation, if granted, provided 
within 15 business days from the date of receipt of the request. Requests for accommodation should be expedited when the accommodation is 
needed to enable the employee to participate in an Agency activity scheduled to occur in the near future. 
(1) If the decision maker believes that it is necessary to obtain medical information to determine whether the requesting individual has a 
disability and/or to identify the functional limitations, the decision maker will request the information as soon as possible after his or her receipt 
of the request for accommodation. FEMA recognizes that the need for documentation may not become apparent until after the interactive 
process has begun. 
(2) In cases where medical documentation is needed, the accommodation, if granted, will be provided within ten (10) business days for an 
applicant, and within 15 business days for an employee, from the date the decision maker receives the relevant information, absent any 
extenuating circumstances. 
c. Where the Disability Program Manager is the decision maker on a request for reasonable accommodation, he/she will make a decision on the 
request and the  accommodation, if granted, will be provided within 15 business days from the date of the request. If medical documentation is 
necessary, the decision will be made within 15 business days of receipt of the medical information, absent any extenuating circumstances. 

All requested appropriate documentation has been provided as requested including my doctors statement. 
Please advise soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:06 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA Request 

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

My name is Winston Brathwaite. I am a Reasonable Accommodation Analyst in the Office of Equal Rights. It has come to my 
attention that you may have recently applied for a reasonable accommodation. If that is the case, I will be the analyst assigned 
to your case. I have attached to this email for your convenience the RA information sheet, and a blank FEMA 256 Form. Once I 
have received these 2 completed forms, I will begin to expeditiously process your request.  

The reasonable accommodation (RA) request process is a confidential one that must not be shared with anyone that does not 
have a need to know.  Besides the supervisor of record (SOR) no other individual should be included or copied in the process, to 
preserve confidentiality.  The RA process starts with the request of the employee for a reasonable accommodation (RA).  The 
request can be done in any way, verbally, email, letter, etc. The SOR should request that the employee fill out a 256-0-1 form 
(Request for Reasonable Accommodation), attached, indicating what they are requesting as an accommodation, the reason for 
the request and if the request is time sensitive.  The employee must sign and date the request.  When an individual requests an 
RA, there should be an interactive process (meeting) between the SOR and the employee to better understand the employee’s 
request and needs.  If the disability is not obvious (visible), the SOR requests the employee to provide medical documentation to 
support the specific need for the RA requested.  Sufficient medical information provides the following information: 

85

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•             Nature, severity and duration of the disability 
•             What major life activity or activities the disability impairs  
•             How the impairment of the major life activity or activities affects the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position  
•             Limitations that the disability imposes on the individual as related to the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position 
•             How the RA requested will assist the employee in the performance of the essential functions of the position  

In FEMA, the supervisor of record (SOR) is the individual that makes the decision of approving, denying or granting an alternate 
RA, after having an interactive discussion with the employee.  OER staff can participate as facilitators, or neutral parties in the 
interactive discussion, if needed.  The RA Analysts in the Office of Equal Rights (OER) RA Unit assist/facilitate the process.  As the 
RA Analyst for this case, I  will provide advice regarding the law, the policy and procedure and can provide assistance with the 
language of the response to the RA, if needed. If you need further assistance, or have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully, 

Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

86

 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

FYSA 

Brathwaite, Winston
Thursday, November 8, 2018 6:54 AM
Merritt, Lisa
Meindl, Max; Terry, Detra; Henri, Foudiya
FW: RA Request

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, November 8, 2018 7:47 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: RA Request 

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

Please see the email string below. Supervisors of Record have 30 days within which to render a decision on a reasonable 
accommodation request. As you mentioned in your email to me, your request was submitted in August. It is now going on 
almost 120 days with no decision rendered. We cannot allow this case to languish any further. If the SOR is prepared to render a 
decision the case can be processed and closed. If not, the case will be closed until the SOR is prepared to render a decision. I 
hope this helps.  

Respectfully,  
Winston 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Wednesday, November 7, 2018 12:10 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: RA Request 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Wednesday, November 7, 2018 12:06 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Greetings, Ms. Terry. I have not heard anything back. I will therefore close this case. If you are the employee want to proceed, a 
new case can be opened. Thank you.  

Respectfully,  
Winston 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Wednesday, October 31, 2018 11:03 AM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Greetings, Ms. Terry:  

Following up on the below e-mail. Please let me know the status. Thank you.  

87

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regards,  
Winston 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, October 25, 2018 2:44 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: RA Request 

Greetings, Ms. Terry: 

Here are the RA documents you will need to review in order to make the determination to grant or deny Mr. Max Meindl’s 
reasonable accommodation request. As the SOR, you are the deciding official. Page 2 of the 256 form should be completed by 
you. Please indicate in box #2 if the request is approved or denied. In box #16, please provide an explanation of what is being 
granted, why  it is being granted, and for what period of time. If you have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, October 25, 2018 9:45 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: RA Request 

I sent this email to you on the 15th . 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 2:02 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

FYI 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 

88

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:18 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Thanks for your response, Mr. Meindl. I will follow up with your supervisor.  

Best,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 2:16 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Previously sent to my supervisor as follows: 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 1:08 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA 
See attached 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

89

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:06 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA Request 

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

My name is Winston Brathwaite. I am a Reasonable Accommodation Analyst in the Office of Equal Rights. It has come to my 
attention that you may have recently applied for a reasonable accommodation. If that is the case, I will be the analyst assigned 
to your case. I have attached to this email for your convenience the RA information sheet, and a blank FEMA 256 Form. Once I 
have received these 2 completed forms, I will begin to expeditiously process your request.  

The reasonable accommodation (RA) request process is a confidential one that must not be shared with anyone that does not 
have a need to know.  Besides the supervisor of record (SOR) no other individual should be included or copied in the process, to 
preserve confidentiality.  The RA process starts with the request of the employee for a reasonable accommodation (RA).  The 
request can be done in any way, verbally, email, letter, etc. The SOR should request that the employee fill out a 256-0-1 form 
(Request for Reasonable Accommodation), attached, indicating what they are requesting as an accommodation, the reason for 
the request and if the request is time sensitive.  The employee must sign and date the request.  When an individual requests an 
RA, there should be an interactive process (meeting) between the SOR and the employee to better understand the employee’s 
request and needs.  If the disability is not obvious (visible), the SOR requests the employee to provide medical documentation to 
support the specific need for the RA requested.  Sufficient medical information provides the following information: 

•             Nature, severity and duration of the disability 
•             What major life activity or activities the disability impairs  
•             How the impairment of the major life activity or activities affects the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position  
•             Limitations that the disability imposes on the individual as related to the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position 
•             How the RA requested will assist the employee in the performance of the essential functions of the position  

In FEMA, the supervisor of record (SOR) is the individual that makes the decision of approving, denying or granting an alternate 
RA, after having an interactive discussion with the employee.  OER staff can participate as facilitators, or neutral parties in the 
interactive discussion, if needed.  The RA Analysts in the Office of Equal Rights (OER) RA Unit assist/facilitate the process.  As the 
RA Analyst for this case, I  will provide advice regarding the law, the policy and procedure and can provide assistance with the 
language of the response to the RA, if needed. If you need further assistance, or have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully, 

Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 

90

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

91

 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Thursday, November 8, 2018 7:26 AM
Brathwaite, Winston; Merritt, Lisa
Terry, Detra; Henri, Foudiya
Re: RA Request

Doctors Information was provided to Winston several weeks ago  

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Brathwaite, Winston 
Sent: Thursday, November 8, 2018 6:53:54 AM 
To: Merritt, Lisa 
Cc: Meindl, Max; Terry, Detra; Henri, Foudiya 
Subject: FW: RA Request  

FYSA 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, November 8, 2018 7:47 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: RA Request 

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

Please see the email string below. Supervisors of Record have 30 days within which to render a decision on a reasonable 
accommodation request. As you mentioned in your email to me, your request was submitted in August. It is now going on 
almost 120 days with no decision rendered. We cannot allow this case to languish any further. If the SOR is prepared to render a 
decision the case can be processed and closed. If not, the case will be closed until the SOR is prepared to render a decision. I 
hope this helps.  

Respectfully,  
Winston 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Wednesday, November 7, 2018 12:10 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: RA Request 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Wednesday, November 7, 2018 12:06 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Greetings, Ms. Terry. I have not heard anything back. I will therefore close this case. If you are the employee want to proceed, a 
new case can be opened. Thank you.  

Respectfully,  
Winston 

92

 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Wednesday, October 31, 2018 11:03 AM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Greetings, Ms. Terry:  

Following up on the below e-mail. Please let me know the status. Thank you.  

Regards,  
Winston 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, October 25, 2018 2:44 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: RA Request 

Greetings, Ms. Terry: 

Here are the RA documents you will need to review in order to make the determination to grant or deny Mr. Max Meindl’s 
reasonable accommodation request. As the SOR, you are the deciding official. Page 2 of the 256 form should be completed by 
you. Please indicate in box #2 if the request is approved or denied. In box #16, please provide an explanation of what is being 
granted, why  it is being granted, and for what period of time. If you have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, October 25, 2018 9:45 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: RA Request 

I sent this email to you on the 15th . 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 2:02 PM 

93

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

FYI 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:18 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Thanks for your response, Mr. Meindl. I will follow up with your supervisor.  

Best,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 2:16 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Previously sent to my supervisor as follows: 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 1:08 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA 
See attached 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

Max J Meindl, PMP 

94

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:06 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA Request 

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

My name is Winston Brathwaite. I am a Reasonable Accommodation Analyst in the Office of Equal Rights. It has come to my 
attention that you may have recently applied for a reasonable accommodation. If that is the case, I will be the analyst assigned 
to your case. I have attached to this email for your convenience the RA information sheet, and a blank FEMA 256 Form. Once I 
have received these 2 completed forms, I will begin to expeditiously process your request.  

The reasonable accommodation (RA) request process is a confidential one that must not be shared with anyone that does not 
have a need to know.  Besides the supervisor of record (SOR) no other individual should be included or copied in the process, to 
preserve confidentiality.  The RA process starts with the request of the employee for a reasonable accommodation (RA).  The 
request can be done in any way, verbally, email, letter, etc. The SOR should request that the employee fill out a 256-0-1 form 
(Request for Reasonable Accommodation), attached, indicating what they are requesting as an accommodation, the reason for 
the request and if the request is time sensitive.  The employee must sign and date the request.  When an individual requests an 
RA, there should be an interactive process (meeting) between the SOR and the employee to better understand the employee’s 
request and needs.  If the disability is not obvious (visible), the SOR requests the employee to provide medical documentation to 
support the specific need for the RA requested.  Sufficient medical information provides the following information: 

•             Nature, severity and duration of the disability 
•             What major life activity or activities the disability impairs  
•             How the impairment of the major life activity or activities affects the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position  
•             Limitations that the disability imposes on the individual as related to the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position 
•             How the RA requested will assist the employee in the performance of the essential functions of the position  

In FEMA, the supervisor of record (SOR) is the individual that makes the decision of approving, denying or granting an alternate 
RA, after having an interactive discussion with the employee.  OER staff can participate as facilitators, or neutral parties in the 
interactive discussion, if needed.  The RA Analysts in the Office of Equal Rights (OER) RA Unit assist/facilitate the process.  As the 
RA Analyst for this case, I  will provide advice regarding the law, the policy and procedure and can provide assistance with the 
language of the response to the RA, if needed. If you need further assistance, or have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully, 

95

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

96

  
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:
Attachments:

Brathwaite, Winston
Thursday, November 8, 2018 7:31 AM
Meindl, Max
Terry, Detra; Merritt, Lisa; Henri, Foudiya
FW: RA Request
RA INFORMATION SHEET-Vista-Meindl.doc; RA information.pdf; Reasonable Accomodation-FEMA Form 256-0-1-08232018.pdf; 
Reasonable Accomodation-FEMA Form 256-0-1-08232018.pdf

FYSA. Documentation was forwarded to the SOR. Did the employee provide the medical documentation requested by the 
SOR/cadre to his SOR? 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, October 25, 2018 2:44 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: RA Request 

Greetings, Ms. Terry: 

Here are the RA documents you will need to review in order to make the determination to grant or deny Mr. Max Meindl’s 
reasonable accommodation request. As the SOR, you are the deciding official. Page 2 of the 256 form should be completed by 
you. Please indicate in box #2 if the request is approved or denied. In box #16, please provide an explanation of what is being 
granted, why  it is being granted, and for what period of time. If you have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, October 25, 2018 9:45 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: RA Request 

I sent this email to you on the 15th . 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 2:02 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
97

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

FYI 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:18 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Thanks for your response, Mr. Meindl. I will follow up with your supervisor.  

Best,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 2:16 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Previously sent to my supervisor as follows: 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 1:08 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA 
See attached 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 

98

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:06 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA Request 

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

My name is Winston Brathwaite. I am a Reasonable Accommodation Analyst in the Office of Equal Rights. It has come to my 
attention that you may have recently applied for a reasonable accommodation. If that is the case, I will be the analyst assigned 
to your case. I have attached to this email for your convenience the RA information sheet, and a blank FEMA 256 Form. Once I 
have received these 2 completed forms, I will begin to expeditiously process your request.  

The reasonable accommodation (RA) request process is a confidential one that must not be shared with anyone that does not 
have a need to know.  Besides the supervisor of record (SOR) no other individual should be included or copied in the process, to 
preserve confidentiality.  The RA process starts with the request of the employee for a reasonable accommodation (RA).  The 
request can be done in any way, verbally, email, letter, etc. The SOR should request that the employee fill out a 256-0-1 form 
(Request for Reasonable Accommodation), attached, indicating what they are requesting as an accommodation, the reason for 
the request and if the request is time sensitive.  The employee must sign and date the request.  When an individual requests an 
RA, there should be an interactive process (meeting) between the SOR and the employee to better understand the employee’s 
request and needs.  If the disability is not obvious (visible), the SOR requests the employee to provide medical documentation to 
support the specific need for the RA requested.  Sufficient medical information provides the following information: 

•             Nature, severity and duration of the disability 
•             What major life activity or activities the disability impairs  
•             How the impairment of the major life activity or activities affects the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position  
•             Limitations that the disability imposes on the individual as related to the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position 
•             How the RA requested will assist the employee in the performance of the essential functions of the position  

In FEMA, the supervisor of record (SOR) is the individual that makes the decision of approving, denying or granting an alternate 
RA, after having an interactive discussion with the employee.  OER staff can participate as facilitators, or neutral parties in the 
interactive discussion, if needed.  The RA Analysts in the Office of Equal Rights (OER) RA Unit assist/facilitate the process.  As the 
RA Analyst for this case, I  will provide advice regarding the law, the policy and procedure and can provide assistance with the 
language of the response to the RA, if needed. If you need further assistance, or have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully, 

99

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

100

 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:
Attachments:

Greetings, Ms. McAllister: 

Brathwaite, Winston
Thursday, November 8, 2018 8:53 AM
McAllister, Jamie
Meindl, Max
RA Request
Dr. Gay (002).pdf; RA INFORMATION SHEET-Vista-Meindl (005).pdf; Reasonable Accomodation-FEMA Form 256-0-1-08232018 
(005).pdf; blank FEMA Form 256-0-1.pdf

It was a pleasure to talk to you on the phone. Per our conversation, Mr. Max Meindl has filed a request for a reasonable 
accommodation. I am the Reasonable Accommodation Analyst assigned to the case and will be working with you on the request. 
If you are not familiar with the process, the reasonable accommodation (RA) request process is a confidential one that must not 
be shared with anyone that does not have a need to know.  Besides the supervisor of record (SOR), no other individual should be 
included or copied in the process, to preserve confidentiality.  The RA process starts with the request of the employee for a 
reasonable accommodation (RA), attached.  The request can be done in any way, verbally, email, letter, etc. The SOR should 
request that the employee fill out a 256-0-1 form (Request for Reasonable Accommodation), attached, indicating what they are 
requesting as an accommodation, the reason for the request and if the request is time sensitive.  The employee must sign and 
date the request.  When an individual requests an RA, there should be an interactive process (meeting) between the SOR and 
the employee to better understand the employee’s request and needs.  If the disability is not obvious (visible), or the SOR is not 
familiar with the employee’s circumstances, the SOR requests the employee to provide medical documentation to support the 
need for the RA requested.  Sufficient medical information provides the following information: 

•             Nature, severity and duration of the disability 
•             What major life activity or activities the disability impairs  
•             How the impairment of the major life activity or activities affects the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position  
•             Limitations that the disability imposes on the individual as related to the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position 
•             How the RA requested will assist the employee in the performance of the essential functions of the position  

Since the medical provider may not be familiar with the essential functions of the employee’s position, here is some guidance to 
be applied in making the decision, regarding how essential functions are determined, as outlined in FEMA’s RA policy: 

Essential functions are “those job duties so fundamental to the position that the individual holds or desires that he/she cannot 
do the job without performing them. A function can be “essential” if, among other things, the position exists specifically to 
perform that function; there are a limited number of other employees who could perform the function; and/or the function is 
highly specialized and the individual is hired based on his/her expertise or ability to perform it. Determination of the essential 
functions of a position must be done on a case-by-case basis so that it reflects the job as actually performed, and not simply the 
components of a generic position description.” 

In FEMA, the supervisor of record (SOR) is the individual that makes the decision of approving, denying or granting an alternate 
RA, after having an interactive discussion with the employee.  OER staff can participate as facilitators, or neutral parties in the 
interactive discussion, if needed. OER’s role is to assist managers with the timely processing of reasonable accommodation 
requests consistent with all relevant statutes, regulations, EEOC, case law and the FEMA RA Policy.  A supervisor has 30 days to 
make a decision on the employee’s request.  As the RA Analyst assigned to this case, I will provide advice to you regarding the 
law, the policy and procedure and can provide assistance with the language of the response to the RA, if needed. I have also 
attached Mr. Meindl’s RA information sheet for you. Please also note that page 2 of the 256 Form must be filled out by you, with 
block 2 indicating whether the request is granted, and block 16 providing an explanation for what is being granted, and for what 
period of time. I have attached a blank 256 Form so that you can complete and return page 2 of it to me. I have also attached 
the medical documentation provided by Mr. Meindl’s health care provider. Because it includes pii, I have password protected it. 
The password will be sent to you in a separate email. If you have any questions, or need any assistance, please let me know. I 
look forward to working with you. 

101

 
 
 
 
 
Respectfully, 

Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

102

 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Thursday, November 8, 2018 1:36 PM
femamax@gmail.com
FW: RA Request
Dr. Gay (002).pdf; RA INFORMATION SHEET-Vista-Meindl (005).pdf; Reasonable Accomodation-FEMA Form 256-0-1-08232018 
(005).pdf; blank FEMA Form 256-0-1.pdf

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, November 8, 2018 8:53 AM 
To: McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA Request 

Greetings, Ms. McAllister: 

It was a pleasure to talk to you on the phone. Per our conversation, Mr. Max Meindl has filed a request for a reasonable 
accommodation. I am the Reasonable Accommodation Analyst assigned to the case and will be working with you on the request. 
If you are not familiar with the process, the reasonable accommodation (RA) request process is a confidential one that must not 
be shared with anyone that does not have a need to know.  Besides the supervisor of record (SOR), no other individual should be 
included or copied in the process, to preserve confidentiality.  The RA process starts with the request of the employee for a 
reasonable accommodation (RA), attached.  The request can be done in any way, verbally, email, letter, etc. The SOR should 
request that the employee fill out a 256-0-1 form (Request for Reasonable Accommodation), attached, indicating what they are 
requesting as an accommodation, the reason for the request and if the request is time sensitive.  The employee must sign and 
date the request.  When an individual requests an RA, there should be an interactive process (meeting) between the SOR and 
the employee to better understand the employee’s request and needs.  If the disability is not obvious (visible), or the SOR is not 
familiar with the employee’s circumstances, the SOR requests the employee to provide medical documentation to support the 
need for the RA requested.  Sufficient medical information provides the following information: 

•             Nature, severity and duration of the disability 
•             What major life activity or activities the disability impairs  
•             How the impairment of the major life activity or activities affects the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position  
•             Limitations that the disability imposes on the individual as related to the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position 

103

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•             How the RA requested will assist the employee in the performance of the essential functions of the position  

Since the medical provider may not be familiar with the essential functions of the employee’s position, here is some guidance to 
be applied in making the decision, regarding how essential functions are determined, as outlined in FEMA’s RA policy: 

Essential functions are “those job duties so fundamental to the position that the individual holds or desires that he/she cannot 
do the job without performing them. A function can be “essential” if, among other things, the position exists specifically to 
perform that function; there are a limited number of other employees who could perform the function; and/or the function is 
highly specialized and the individual is hired based on his/her expertise or ability to perform it. Determination of the essential 
functions of a position must be done on a case-by-case basis so that it reflects the job as actually performed, and not simply the 
components of a generic position description.” 

In FEMA, the supervisor of record (SOR) is the individual that makes the decision of approving, denying or granting an alternate 
RA, after having an interactive discussion with the employee.  OER staff can participate as facilitators, or neutral parties in the 
interactive discussion, if needed. OER’s role is to assist managers with the timely processing of reasonable accommodation 
requests consistent with all relevant statutes, regulations, EEOC, case law and the FEMA RA Policy.  A supervisor has 30 days to 
make a decision on the employee’s request.  As the RA Analyst assigned to this case, I will provide advice to you regarding the 
law, the policy and procedure and can provide assistance with the language of the response to the RA, if needed. I have also 
attached Mr. Meindl’s RA information sheet for you. Please also note that page 2 of the 256 Form must be filled out by you, with 
block 2 indicating whether the request is granted, and block 16 providing an explanation for what is being granted, and for what 
period of time. I have attached a blank 256 Form so that you can complete and return page 2 of it to me. I have also attached 
the medical documentation provided by Mr. Meindl’s health care provider. Because it includes pii, I have password protected it. 
The password will be sent to you in a separate email. If you have any questions, or need any assistance, please let me know. I 
look forward to working with you. 

Respectfully, 

Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

104

 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:
Attachments:

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

Brathwaite, Winston
Wednesday, November 14, 2018 2:21 PM
Meindl, Max
Terry, Detra
256 Form
RA INFORMATION SHEET-empl.doc; blank FEMA Form 256-0-1.pdf

I just spoke to your Supervisor of Record, Ms. Detra Terry, who is included in this email, regarding your recent reasonable 
accommodation request. Now that it appears all the documents are ready, this should hopefully not take very long to process. I 
have attached a blank 256 Form to this email for you to fill out at your convenience, as well as an RA information sheet. Once 
completed, these and the other supporting documentation for your request can be submitted via email to the FEMA-
Reasonable-Accommodation@fema.dhs.gov inbox for re-assignment. Thank you very much.   

Respectfully, 

Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

105

 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Thursday, November 15, 2018 9:22 AM
Brathwaite, Winston
Terry, Detra
RE: 256 Form

Winston, 
I’ve already submitted all of these documents and my supervisor of record, per our discussion last week (11/08/2018 @ 08:21 HRS 
for 2 minutes), is: 

Jamie McAllister 
Deputy Infrastructure Branch Director  
DR 4332 TX JFO Austin 
Region 6 Infrastructure Branch 
DHS/FEMA 
(202) 709-0851 Cell 
jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Wednesday, November 14, 2018 2:21 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: 256 Form 

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

I just spoke to your Supervisor of Record, Ms. Detra Terry, who is included in this email, regarding your recent reasonable 
accommodation request. Now that it appears all the documents are ready, this should hopefully not take very long to process. I 
have attached a blank 256 Form to this email for you to fill out at your convenience, as well as an RA information sheet. Once 
completed, these and the other supporting documentation for your request can be submitted via email to the FEMA-
Reasonable-Accommodation@fema.dhs.gov inbox for re-assignment. Thank you very much.   

Respectfully, 

Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 

106

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

107

 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

femamax@gmail.com
Wednesday, December 12, 2018 3:50 PM
Meindl, Max
ra

December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 13th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.  As of this 
date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.  Although the RA request has passed through many 
hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen it important enough to respond to my RA 
request.  When considering that over four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.  I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be 
provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.  I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as 
required by policy.  Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?  All 
requested and required information has been provided per policy and if you have any questions, please feel free to contact me. 
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

108

Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Greetings -  

Fernandez, Luz
Wednesday, December 12, 2018 4:09 PM
Meindl, Max
Automatic reply: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

I'm out of the office on extended leave. I will have limited access to my phone and e-mails.  For urgent matters, call the 
Office of Equal Rights Reasonable Accommodation Unit at 202-212-3535 Option 2. 

Please forward all requests for reasonable accommodations directly to FEMA Reasonable Accommodation mailbox: 
FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation@fema.dhs.gov. 

For ASL Reasonable Accommodations support, email: FEMA-Reasonable- Accommodation@fema.dhs.gov, copy 
Carol Curtis: Carol.Curtis@fema.dhs.gov and Gavin Junkins at gavin.n.junkins@fema.dhs.gov. 

Thank you -  

Luz A. Fernandez 

109

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Henri, Foudiya
Wednesday, December 12, 2018 4:09 PM
Meindl, Max
Automatic reply: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

I am out on use or lose leave from DEC. 10 - JAN. 5. 

For a NEW RA Request please forward dirctly to FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation@fema.dhs.gov for a RA 
Team member to assit. 

For follow up to an existing request my back up while I am away is Mr. Winston. 
Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov.  For follow up please contact Mr. Brathwaithe directly and copy me.  You do not 
need to copy the FEMA RA mailbox. 

Thank you  
Foudiya Henri 
DHS-FEMA 
Office of Equal Rights 
202-212-4490 Desk 
202-394-4633 Cell 

110

 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Mr. Meindl, 

Brathwaite, Winston
Thursday, December 13, 2018 6:38 AM
Meindl, Max
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

I was under the impression your SOR was granted. Please contact your SOR for clarification.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 5:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

111

 
 
 
 
 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

112

 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Good morning –  

FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation
Thursday, December 13, 2018 7:35 AM
Meindl, Max; Brathwaite, Winston
FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

To whom did you submit your request?  The supervisor of record is the decision maker on all RA request.  OER’s role is to 
provide technical guidance to managers and employees to ensure that RA requests are processed in accordance with FEMA’s RA 
policy and the law.   

I note that Winston in our office is the case manager assigned to this request.  We will follow-up with you and your supervisor to 
determine the status of your request.  As RAs are confidential, I have replied and omitted the other recipients included on the 
email below.  

Donna M. Peterkin  
Deputy Director  
Office of Equal Rights (OER)  

For Official Use Only - Privacy Act Sensitive. This document was prepared by DHS/FEMA and is covered by federal and state 
law governing electronic communications.  It may contain confidential, pre-decisional, and/or sensitive Government information, 
and is not for release, review, retransmission, dissemination or use by anyone other than the intended recipient.  Please consult the 
original sender before disclosing any information contained herein.  If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to 
the sender and delete this message. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 5:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   

113

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

114

 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:31 AM
TERRY, DETRA S.
FW: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

Detra, 
Please see below and contact Jamie for me, please. 
According to Winston, it was granted. 
I’m at a loss to understand. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 6:38 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Mr. Meindl, 

I was under the impression your SOR was granted. Please contact your SOR for clarification.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 5:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   

115

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

116

 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:32 AM
Brathwaite, Winston
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

I don’t understand Winston. 
Was the RA granted or the Supervisor of Record (SOR) identified? 
Appreciate all you’ve done Winston. 
Thank you very much. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 6:38 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Mr. Meindl, 

I was under the impression your SOR was granted. Please contact your SOR for clarification.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 5:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   

117

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

118

 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:34 AM
Brathwaite, Winston
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

I noticed that Ms. McAllister did approve an annual leave request yesterday but that is all I see anywhere. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 6:38 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Mr. Meindl, 

I was under the impression your SOR was granted. Please contact your SOR for clarification.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 5:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   

119

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

120

 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Brathwaite, Winston
Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:35 AM
Meindl, Max
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

From what I understand, yes. However, if you have not been informed, I will reach back and see what happened. It may be that 
you simply were not informed of your approval by your SOR. Let me check and see.  

Respectfully,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:32 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

I don’t understand Winston. 
Was the RA granted or the Supervisor of Record (SOR) identified? 
Appreciate all you’ve done Winston. 
Thank you very much. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 6:38 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Mr. Meindl, 

I was under the impression your SOR was granted. Please contact your SOR for clarification.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 5:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 

121

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

122

 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Brathwaite, Winston
Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:36 AM
Meindl, Max
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

Ok. Let me see if I can figure out what is going on. Bear with me. I will get back to you as soon as I can.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:34 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

I noticed that Ms. McAllister did approve an annual leave request yesterday but that is all I see anywhere. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 6:38 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Mr. Meindl, 

I was under the impression your SOR was granted. Please contact your SOR for clarification.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 5:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

123

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

124

 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:38 AM
Brathwaite, Winston
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

Thank you very much. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:35 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

From what I understand, yes. However, if you have not been informed, I will reach back and see what happened. It may be that 
you simply were not informed of your approval by your SOR. Let me check and see.  

Respectfully,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:32 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

I don’t understand Winston. 
Was the RA granted or the Supervisor of Record (SOR) identified? 
Appreciate all you’ve done Winston. 
Thank you very much. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

125

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 6:38 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Mr. Meindl, 

I was under the impression your SOR was granted. Please contact your SOR for clarification.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 5:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 

126

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

127

 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:39 AM
Brathwaite, Winston
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

10-4 Winston, thank you. 
The specific RA would have assisted in my situation for the past few days if it is actually in place. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:36 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Ok. Let me see if I can figure out what is going on. Bear with me. I will get back to you as soon as I can.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:34 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

I noticed that Ms. McAllister did approve an annual leave request yesterday but that is all I see anywhere. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

128

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 6:38 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Mr. Meindl, 

I was under the impression your SOR was granted. Please contact your SOR for clarification.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 5:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

129

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

130

 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Brathwaite, Winston
Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:42 AM
Meindl, Max
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

Ok. The point of the RA is to assist you in doing your job. So, I apologize if you were not informed, or it was not put in place for 
you. I am sure there is a simple solution to this. Something may have just fallen through the cracks. As soon as I hear something, 
I will reach out to you and let you know.  

-W 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:39 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

10-4 Winston, thank you. 
The specific RA would have assisted in my situation for the past few days if it is actually in place. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:36 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Ok. Let me see if I can figure out what is going on. Bear with me. I will get back to you as soon as I can.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:34 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

I noticed that Ms. McAllister did approve an annual leave request yesterday but that is all I see anywhere. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 

131

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 6:38 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Mr. Meindl, 

I was under the impression your SOR was granted. Please contact your SOR for clarification.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 5:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 

132

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

133

 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:45 AM
Brathwaite, Winston
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

Thank you Winston, you’re a gentleman and scholar in my book. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:42 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Ok. The point of the RA is to assist you in doing your job. So, I apologize if you were not informed, or it was not put in place for 
you. I am sure there is a simple solution to this. Something may have just fallen through the cracks. As soon as I hear something, 
I will reach out to you and let you know.  

-W 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:39 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

10-4 Winston, thank you. 
The specific RA would have assisted in my situation for the past few days if it is actually in place. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

134

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:36 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Ok. Let me see if I can figure out what is going on. Bear with me. I will get back to you as soon as I can.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:34 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

I noticed that Ms. McAllister did approve an annual leave request yesterday but that is all I see anywhere. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 6:38 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Mr. Meindl, 

I was under the impression your SOR was granted. Please contact your SOR for clarification.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 5:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 

135

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

136

 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:05 AM
TERRY, DETRA S.
FW: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

Please see below, from Winston. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:04 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Thanks Max. If I knew you were unaware I would have acted sooner. I really thought you had been informed this was granted. 
Still working on it to see what happened.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:45 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Thank you Winston, you’re a gentleman and scholar in my book. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

137

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:42 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Ok. The point of the RA is to assist you in doing your job. So, I apologize if you were not informed, or it was not put in place for 
you. I am sure there is a simple solution to this. Something may have just fallen through the cracks. As soon as I hear something, 
I will reach out to you and let you know.  

-W 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:39 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

10-4 Winston, thank you. 
The specific RA would have assisted in my situation for the past few days if it is actually in place. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:36 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Ok. Let me see if I can figure out what is going on. Bear with me. I will get back to you as soon as I can.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:34 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

I noticed that Ms. McAllister did approve an annual leave request yesterday but that is all I see anywhere. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 

138

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 6:38 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Mr. Meindl, 

I was under the impression your SOR was granted. Please contact your SOR for clarification.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 5:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

139

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

140

 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Brathwaite, Winston
Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:04 AM
Meindl, Max
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

Thanks Max. If I knew you were unaware I would have acted sooner. I really thought you had been informed this was granted. 
Still working on it to see what happened.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:45 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Thank you Winston, you’re a gentleman and scholar in my book. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:42 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Ok. The point of the RA is to assist you in doing your job. So, I apologize if you were not informed, or it was not put in place for 
you. I am sure there is a simple solution to this. Something may have just fallen through the cracks. As soon as I hear something, 
I will reach out to you and let you know.  

-W 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:39 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

10-4 Winston, thank you. 
The specific RA would have assisted in my situation for the past few days if it is actually in place. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 

141

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:36 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Ok. Let me see if I can figure out what is going on. Bear with me. I will get back to you as soon as I can.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:34 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

I noticed that Ms. McAllister did approve an annual leave request yesterday but that is all I see anywhere. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 6:38 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Mr. Meindl, 

I was under the impression your SOR was granted. Please contact your SOR for clarification.  

142

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 5:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

143

 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Thursday, December 13, 2018 11:51 AM
Brathwaite, Winston
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

Winston, 
Any update or is everything still unclear? 

Regards, 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:04 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Thanks Max. If I knew you were unaware I would have acted sooner. I really thought you had been informed this was granted. 
Still working on it to see what happened.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:45 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Thank you Winston, you’re a gentleman and scholar in my book. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

144

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:42 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Ok. The point of the RA is to assist you in doing your job. So, I apologize if you were not informed, or it was not put in place for 
you. I am sure there is a simple solution to this. Something may have just fallen through the cracks. As soon as I hear something, 
I will reach out to you and let you know.  

-W 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:39 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

10-4 Winston, thank you. 
The specific RA would have assisted in my situation for the past few days if it is actually in place. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:36 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Ok. Let me see if I can figure out what is going on. Bear with me. I will get back to you as soon as I can.  

145

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:34 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

I noticed that Ms. McAllister did approve an annual leave request yesterday but that is all I see anywhere. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 6:38 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Mr. Meindl, 

I was under the impression your SOR was granted. Please contact your SOR for clarification.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 5:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   

146

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

147

 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Brathwaite, Winston
Thursday, December 13, 2018 12:16 PM
Meindl, Max
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

It looks like your SOR is in the process of reviewing the documentation again to make a final decision.   

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 12:51 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Winston, 
Any update or is everything still unclear? 

Regards, 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:04 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Thanks Max. If I knew you were unaware I would have acted sooner. I really thought you had been informed this was granted. 
Still working on it to see what happened.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:45 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Thank you Winston, you’re a gentleman and scholar in my book. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 

148

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:42 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Ok. The point of the RA is to assist you in doing your job. So, I apologize if you were not informed, or it was not put in place for 
you. I am sure there is a simple solution to this. Something may have just fallen through the cracks. As soon as I hear something, 
I will reach out to you and let you know.  

-W 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:39 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

10-4 Winston, thank you. 
The specific RA would have assisted in my situation for the past few days if it is actually in place. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:36 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

149

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ok. Let me see if I can figure out what is going on. Bear with me. I will get back to you as soon as I can.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:34 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

I noticed that Ms. McAllister did approve an annual leave request yesterday but that is all I see anywhere. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 6:38 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Mr. Meindl, 

I was under the impression your SOR was granted. Please contact your SOR for clarification.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 5:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   

150

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

151

 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

10-4, thanks. 

Meindl, Max
Thursday, December 13, 2018 3:32 PM
Brathwaite, Winston
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 12:16 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

It looks like your SOR is in the process of reviewing the documentation again to make a final decision.   

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 12:51 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Winston, 
Any update or is everything still unclear? 

Regards, 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

152

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:04 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Thanks Max. If I knew you were unaware I would have acted sooner. I really thought you had been informed this was granted. 
Still working on it to see what happened.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:45 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Thank you Winston, you’re a gentleman and scholar in my book. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:42 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Ok. The point of the RA is to assist you in doing your job. So, I apologize if you were not informed, or it was not put in place for 
you. I am sure there is a simple solution to this. Something may have just fallen through the cracks. As soon as I hear something, 
I will reach out to you and let you know.  

-W 

153

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:39 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

10-4 Winston, thank you. 
The specific RA would have assisted in my situation for the past few days if it is actually in place. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:36 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Ok. Let me see if I can figure out what is going on. Bear with me. I will get back to you as soon as I can.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:34 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

I noticed that Ms. McAllister did approve an annual leave request yesterday but that is all I see anywhere. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

154

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 6:38 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Mr. Meindl, 

I was under the impression your SOR was granted. Please contact your SOR for clarification.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 5:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

155

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
156

 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Good morning Mr. Meindl: 

Brathwaite, Winston
Friday, December 14, 2018 9:36 AM
Meindl, Max
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

Just wanted to follow up with you and let you know that I reached out to your SOR, Jamie McAllister this morning and left a 
voicemail. To the best of my knowledge Jamie is currently working on your RA.  

Respectfully,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 4:32 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

10-4, thanks. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 12:16 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

It looks like your SOR is in the process of reviewing the documentation again to make a final decision.   

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 12:51 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Winston, 
Any update or is everything still unclear? 

157

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regards, 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:04 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Thanks Max. If I knew you were unaware I would have acted sooner. I really thought you had been informed this was granted. 
Still working on it to see what happened.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:45 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Thank you Winston, you’re a gentleman and scholar in my book. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:42 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

158

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ok. The point of the RA is to assist you in doing your job. So, I apologize if you were not informed, or it was not put in place for 
you. I am sure there is a simple solution to this. Something may have just fallen through the cracks. As soon as I hear something, 
I will reach out to you and let you know.  

-W 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:39 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

10-4 Winston, thank you. 
The specific RA would have assisted in my situation for the past few days if it is actually in place. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:36 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Ok. Let me see if I can figure out what is going on. Bear with me. I will get back to you as soon as I can.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:34 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

I noticed that Ms. McAllister did approve an annual leave request yesterday but that is all I see anywhere. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

159

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 6:38 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Mr. Meindl, 

I was under the impression your SOR was granted. Please contact your SOR for clarification.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 5:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 

160

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

161

 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Friday, December 14, 2018 1:17 PM
Brathwaite, Winston
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

10-4 Winston, appreciate the update. 
A box checked yes would pretty quick to do so  
I’m guessing a reason to deny would take a bit longer. 
All conjecture I admit, but no other way to look at it, in my opinion, 

Have a great day! 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Friday, December 14, 2018 9:36 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Good morning Mr. Meindl: 

Just wanted to follow up with you and let you know that I reached out to your SOR, Jamie McAllister this morning and left a 
voicemail. To the best of my knowledge Jamie is currently working on your RA.  

Respectfully,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 4:32 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

10-4, thanks. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 

162

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 12:16 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

It looks like your SOR is in the process of reviewing the documentation again to make a final decision.   

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 12:51 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Winston, 
Any update or is everything still unclear? 

Regards, 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:04 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Thanks Max. If I knew you were unaware I would have acted sooner. I really thought you had been informed this was granted. 
Still working on it to see what happened.  

163

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:45 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Thank you Winston, you’re a gentleman and scholar in my book. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:42 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Ok. The point of the RA is to assist you in doing your job. So, I apologize if you were not informed, or it was not put in place for 
you. I am sure there is a simple solution to this. Something may have just fallen through the cracks. As soon as I hear something, 
I will reach out to you and let you know.  

-W 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:39 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

10-4 Winston, thank you. 
The specific RA would have assisted in my situation for the past few days if it is actually in place. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

164

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:36 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Ok. Let me see if I can figure out what is going on. Bear with me. I will get back to you as soon as I can.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:34 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

I noticed that Ms. McAllister did approve an annual leave request yesterday but that is all I see anywhere. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 6:38 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Mr. Meindl, 

I was under the impression your SOR was granted. Please contact your SOR for clarification.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 5:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 

165

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

166

 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Max, 

I apologize for the delay. 

McAllister, Jamie
Friday, December 14, 2018 2:02 PM
Meindl, Max
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

I submitted the response and you should be receiving it shortly from Winston. Please do not hesitate to reach out to me to 
discuss once you get it.  

Jamie McAllister 
Deputy Infrastructure Branch Director  
DR 4332 TX JFO Austin 
Region 6 Infrastructure Branch 
DHS/FEMA 
(202) 709-0851 Cell 
jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 4:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 

167

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

168

 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Friday, December 14, 2018 2:14 PM
Brathwaite, Winston
FW: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

Well Winston, I received the email below from Jamie and apparently she sent the information to you and not to me but I guessing 
that it was a denial or a qualified denial. 
Looking forward to hearing from you soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: McAllister, Jamie  
Sent: Friday, December 14, 2018 2:02 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Max, 

I apologize for the delay. 

I submitted the response and you should be receiving it shortly from Winston. Please do not hesitate to reach out to me to 
discuss once you get it.  

Jamie McAllister 
Deputy Infrastructure Branch Director  
DR 4332 TX JFO Austin 
Region 6 Infrastructure Branch 
DHS/FEMA 
(202) 709-0851 Cell 
jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 4:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 

169

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

170

 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Friday, December 14, 2018 2:29 PM
femamax@gmail.com
RA
Reasonable Accomodation-FEMA Form 256-0-1-08232018.pdf; Request for Work Schedule FEMA Form 106-1-1-1 (002).pdf; RA 
INFORMATION SHEET-Vista-Meindl.doc; Dr. Gay.pdf; 123-9-0-1.pdf; 1430_1.pdf; fema_manual_1430_1
_reasonable_accommodations.pdf; FM 123-9-1.pdf; MEDICAL TELEWORK REQUIREMENTS FORM.pdf; OPM telework agency2a-
guide.pdf; TELEWORK REQUEST FOR 07242018-PLUS 4 HOURS SICK DAY.pdf; WH-382.pdf; WH-381.pdf; WH-380-E-1.pdf; 
wh-380-e.pdf; 123-9-0-1.pdf; TELEWORK REQUEST FOR 07242018-PLUS 4 HOURS SICK DAY.pdf; fema_manual_1430_1
_reasonable_accommodations.pdf

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

171

 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:

Subject:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, February 12, 2019 1:49 PM
Brathwaite, Winston; Johnson, Jo Linda; Peterkin, Donna
FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation; Fernandez, Luz; Maddox Britt, Sandra; Oke, Nicole; Goudy, Douglas; Henri, Foudiya; Avery, 
Darlene
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

To whom it may concern, 
Feb 12th 2019 
On or about August 27th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly SIX (6) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy governing 
this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 4:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

172

 
 
 
 
To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

173

 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Peterkin, Donna
Tuesday, February 12, 2019 1:50 PM
Meindl, Max
Automatic reply: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

Thank you for your email.  I am out of the office on leave.   

If you have an urgent Reasonable Accommodation matter, please contact Winston Braithwaite at 
Winston.Braithwaite@fema.dhs.gov.    

Please see the following OER points of contact:  

Reasonable Accommdattion - FEMA-Reasonable-Accomodation@fema.dhs.gov  
Anti-Harassement Unit - FEMA.Harassment@fema.dhs.gov  

174

 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Dear Mr. Meindl, 

Oke, Nicole
Tuesday, February 12, 2019 2:22 PM
Meindl, Max; Brathwaite, Winston; Johnson, Jo Linda; Peterkin, Donna
FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation; Fernandez, Luz; Maddox Britt, Sandra; Goudy, Douglas; Henri, Foudiya; Avery, Darlene
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

I will research the matter and circle back with a response and next steps.   

Respectfully, 

Nicole  

Nicole Oke 
Informal Unit Chief, Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/Federal Emergency Management Agency 
500 C Street, SW  Room 4SW-0915 
Washington, DC 20472-3505 
Cell: 202.717.1595 
E-mail: nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING:  This document and attachments are for official use only.  It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information.  This information 
shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee without prior authorization of the originator.  This communication along 
with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and 
legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability with civil and criminal 
penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or 
otherwise use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, February 12, 2019 2:49 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Johnson, Jo Linda <jolinda.johnson@fema.dhs.gov>; Peterkin, 
Donna <donna.peterkin@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas <Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; 
Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
Feb 12th 2019 
On or about August 27th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   

175

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
When considering that nearly SIX (6) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy governing 
this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 4:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 

176

 
 
 
 
 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

177

 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Brathwaite, Winston
Tuesday, February 12, 2019 2:43 PM
Oke, Nicole; Meindl, Max; Johnson, Jo Linda; Peterkin, Donna
FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation; Fernandez, Luz; Maddox Britt, Sandra; Goudy, Douglas; Henri, Foudiya; Avery, Darlene
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

Hi Nicole. I was awaiting language from Mr. Meindle’s cadre management to justify their denial of his request. I received that 
language and have been working on a draft response yesterday and today. I hope to have a draft completed by the end of this 
week.  

Respectfully,  
Winston 

From: Oke, Nicole  
Sent: Tuesday, February 12, 2019 3:22 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>; Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Johnson, Jo Linda 
<jolinda.johnson@fema.dhs.gov>; Peterkin, Donna <donna.peterkin@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Dear Mr. Meindl, 

I will research the matter and circle back with a response and next steps.   

Respectfully, 

Nicole  

Nicole Oke 
Informal Unit Chief, Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/Federal Emergency Management Agency 
500 C Street, SW  Room 4SW-0915 
Washington, DC 20472-3505 
Cell: 202.717.1595 
E-mail: nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING:  This document and attachments are for official use only.  It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information.  This information 
shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee without prior authorization of the originator.  This communication along 
with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and 
legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability with civil and criminal 
penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or 
otherwise use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

178

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, February 12, 2019 2:49 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Johnson, Jo Linda <jolinda.johnson@fema.dhs.gov>; Peterkin, 
Donna <donna.peterkin@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas <Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; 
Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
Feb 12th 2019 
On or about August 27th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly SIX (6) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy governing 
this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 4:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 

179

 
 
 
 
 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

180

 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:

Subject:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, February 27, 2019 4:00 PM
Oke, Nicole; Brathwaite, Winston; Johnson, Jo Linda; Peterkin, Donna
FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation; Fernandez, Luz; Maddox Britt, Sandra; Goudy, Douglas; Henri, Foudiya; Avery, Darlene; 
TERRY, DETRA S.; 'rick@guerradays.com'; Slie, Brian; McAllister, Jamie
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

Nicole, 
As of this date I’ve yet to receive an answer to my RA request filed in August of 2018.   
I am at a loss trying to understand how FEMA/DHS policy can be so blatantly ignored/violated in such a casual manner by so many. 
My request was based on a serious heart condition requiring a bit of flexibility in my morning schedule to accommodate issues I 
face daily.   
My heart surgery, which was scheduled for 01/25/2019, had to be postponed/rescheduled for a different time, but I am hoping it 
will be soon.   
My simple request to FEMA/DHS was for some understanding and flexibility to assist me over the past 6 months, in a challenging 
time, and the FEMA team, thus far, has deemed me insignificant and not worthy of a response nor consideration of assistance. 
Can you explain this? 

NOTE: Equal Rights Office policy requires the agency to provide requested Reasonable Accommodation within 10 days, barring 
extenuating circumstances. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Oke, Nicole  
Sent: Tuesday, February 12, 2019 2:22 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>; Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Johnson, Jo Linda 
<jolinda.johnson@fema.dhs.gov>; Peterkin, Donna <donna.peterkin@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Dear Mr. Meindl, 

I will research the matter and circle back with a response and next steps.   

Respectfully, 

181

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nicole  

Nicole Oke 
Informal Unit Chief, Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/Federal Emergency Management Agency 
500 C Street, SW  Room 4SW-0915 
Washington, DC 20472-3505 
Cell: 202.717.1595 
E-mail: nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING:  This document and attachments are for official use only.  It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information.  This information 
shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee without prior authorization of the originator.  This communication along 
with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and 
legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability with civil and criminal 
penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or 
otherwise use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, February 12, 2019 2:49 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Johnson, Jo Linda <jolinda.johnson@fema.dhs.gov>; Peterkin, 
Donna <donna.peterkin@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas <Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; 
Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
Feb 12th 2019 
On or about August 27th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly SIX (6) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy governing 
this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 

182

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 4:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

183

 
 
 
 
information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

184

 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Johnson, Jo Linda
Wednesday, February 27, 2019 4:01 PM
Meindl, Max
Automatic reply: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

Thank you for your email.  I am TDY the week of February 25. I will return to the office March 4, 2019.  I will 
check email periodically.  Thank you for your patience with any delay in responding. 

Jo Linda Johnson 
Director 
Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/FEMA 

185

 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Goudy, Douglas
Wednesday, February 27, 2019 4:01 PM
Meindl, Max
Automatic reply: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

I will be out of the office  from February 22-March 1, 2019 attending training and have limited email access, if you require immediate assistance please 
contact Nicole Oke, Informal Unit Lead at ext. (202) 717-1595.     

186

 
      
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Dear Mr. Meindl, 

Oke, Nicole
Monday, March 4, 2019 5:57 AM
Meindl, Max
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

I apologize for the delay.  You should have a response by close of business this week. 

Respectfully, 

Nicole  

Nicole Oke 
Informal Unit Chief, Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/Federal Emergency Management Agency 
500 C Street, SW  Room 4SW-0915 
Washington, DC 20472-3505 
Cell: 202.717.1595 
E-mail: nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING:  This document and attachments are for official use only.  It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information.  This information 
shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee without prior authorization of the originator.  This communication along 
with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and 
legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability with civil and criminal 
penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or 
otherwise use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, February 27, 2019 5:00 PM 
To: Oke, Nicole <nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Johnson, Jo Linda 
<jolinda.johnson@fema.dhs.gov>; Peterkin, Donna <donna.peterkin@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov>; rick@guerradays.com; Slie, Brian <Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie 
<jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Nicole, 
As of this date I’ve yet to receive an answer to my RA request filed in August of 2018.   
I am at a loss trying to understand how FEMA/DHS policy can be so blatantly ignored/violated in such a casual manner by so many. 
My request was based on a serious heart condition requiring a bit of flexibility in my morning schedule to accommodate issues I 
face daily.   

187

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
My heart surgery, which was scheduled for 01/25/2019, had to be postponed/rescheduled for a different time, but I am hoping it 
will be soon.   
My simple request to FEMA/DHS was for some understanding and flexibility to assist me over the past 6 months, in a challenging 
time, and the FEMA team, thus far, has deemed me insignificant and not worthy of a response nor consideration of assistance. 
Can you explain this? 

NOTE: Equal Rights Office policy requires the agency to provide requested Reasonable Accommodation within 10 days, barring 
extenuating circumstances. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Oke, Nicole  
Sent: Tuesday, February 12, 2019 2:22 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>; Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Johnson, Jo Linda 
<jolinda.johnson@fema.dhs.gov>; Peterkin, Donna <donna.peterkin@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Dear Mr. Meindl, 

I will research the matter and circle back with a response and next steps.   

Respectfully, 

Nicole  

Nicole Oke 
Informal Unit Chief, Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/Federal Emergency Management Agency 
500 C Street, SW  Room 4SW-0915 
Washington, DC 20472-3505 
Cell: 202.717.1595 
E-mail: nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov 

188

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
WARNING:  This document and attachments are for official use only.  It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information.  This information 
shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee without prior authorization of the originator.  This communication along 
with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and 
legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability with civil and criminal 
penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or 
otherwise use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, February 12, 2019 2:49 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Johnson, Jo Linda <jolinda.johnson@fema.dhs.gov>; Peterkin, 
Donna <donna.peterkin@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas <Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; 
Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
Feb 12th 2019 
On or about August 27th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly SIX (6) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy governing 
this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

189

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 4:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

190

 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, March 6, 2019 1:45 PM
Oke, Nicole
femamax@gmail.com
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

Nicole, 
Why is the RA process so ignored/abused by the process? 
I’ve done everything required on my end yet the “institution” can’t seem to take the request seriously nor process the request 
pursuant to DHS/FEMA policy. 
This seems unjust, unfair and unreasonable to an individual requesting/requiring a timely response to a request. 
Instead of a reasonable accommodation, so I can be allowed to do a couple of hours of telework before driving 60 miles to the 
office, I am required to take “leave without pay” on a regular basis resulting in a diminished paycheck.   
All in all, it seems as if the default position of DHS/FEMA is to stall and/or decline any request, for whatever reason. 
I would expect or request that the process, mine specifically, be looked in to, and to identify process disconnects and put eyes on 
a way to improve the process, especially the timeliness requirements or lack thereof 
According to policy: 
FEMA Manual 1430.1 Chg.1 December 3, 2002 
4-4 
Chapter 5 
Time Frames 
5-1. Processing Requests. FEMA will process requests for reasonable accommodation and provide accommodations, where they are appropriate, 
in as short a time frame as reasonably possible. FEMA recognizes, however, that the time necessary to process a request will depend on the 
nature of the accommodation requested and whether it is necessary to obtain supporting information. Time frames for processing requests and 
providing reasonable accommodation where no supporting information is required are as follows: 
a. Requests from applicants for employment should be expedited when necessary to ensure the applicant’s ability to compete for the position. 
However, these requests should not exceed ten (10) business days. 
b. If a request from an employee is processed by the supervisor, the request should be processed, and the accommodation, if granted, provided 
within 15 business days from the date of receipt of the request. Requests for accommodation should be expedited when the accommodation is 
needed to enable the employee to participate in an Agency activity scheduled to occur in the near future. 
(1) If the decision maker believes that it is necessary to obtain medical information to determine whether the requesting individual has a 
disability and/or to identify the functional limitations, the decision maker will request the information as soon as possible after his or her receipt 
of the request for accommodation. FEMA recognizes that the need for documentation may not become apparent until after the interactive 
process has begun. 
(2) In cases where medical documentation is needed, the accommodation, if granted, will be provided within ten (10) business days for an 
applicant, and within 15 business days for an employee, from the date the decision maker receives the relevant information, absent any 
extenuating circumstances. 
c. Where the Disability Program Manager is the decision maker on a request for reasonable accommodation, he/she will make a decision on the 
request and the  accommodation, if granted, will be provided within 15 business days from the date of the request. If medical documentation is 
necessary, the decision will be made within 15 business days of receipt of the medical information, absent any extenuating circumstances. 

We are going on 132 business days since AUGUST 23rd 2018 and 196 calendar days. 
Unreasonable and unnecessary. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

191

 
 
information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Oke, Nicole  
Sent: Monday, March 4, 2019 5:57 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Dear Mr. Meindl, 

I apologize for the delay.  You should have a response by close of business this week. 

Respectfully, 

Nicole  

Nicole Oke 
Informal Unit Chief, Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/Federal Emergency Management Agency 
500 C Street, SW  Room 4SW-0915 
Washington, DC 20472-3505 
Cell: 202.717.1595 
E-mail: nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING:  This document and attachments are for official use only.  It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information.  This information 
shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee without prior authorization of the originator.  This communication along 
with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and 
legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability with civil and criminal 
penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or 
otherwise use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, February 27, 2019 5:00 PM 
To: Oke, Nicole <nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Johnson, Jo Linda 
<jolinda.johnson@fema.dhs.gov>; Peterkin, Donna <donna.peterkin@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov>; rick@guerradays.com; Slie, Brian <Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie 

192

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Nicole, 
As of this date I’ve yet to receive an answer to my RA request filed in August of 2018.   
I am at a loss trying to understand how FEMA/DHS policy can be so blatantly ignored/violated in such a casual manner by so many. 
My request was based on a serious heart condition requiring a bit of flexibility in my morning schedule to accommodate issues I 
face daily.   
My heart surgery, which was scheduled for 01/25/2019, had to be postponed/rescheduled for a different time, but I am hoping it 
will be soon.   
My simple request to FEMA/DHS was for some understanding and flexibility to assist me over the past 6 months, in a challenging 
time, and the FEMA team, thus far, has deemed me insignificant and not worthy of a response nor consideration of assistance. 
Can you explain this? 

NOTE: Equal Rights Office policy requires the agency to provide requested Reasonable Accommodation within 10 days, barring 
extenuating circumstances. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Oke, Nicole  
Sent: Tuesday, February 12, 2019 2:22 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>; Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Johnson, Jo Linda 
<jolinda.johnson@fema.dhs.gov>; Peterkin, Donna <donna.peterkin@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Dear Mr. Meindl, 

I will research the matter and circle back with a response and next steps.   

Respectfully, 

Nicole  

Nicole Oke 
Informal Unit Chief, Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/Federal Emergency Management Agency 
500 C Street, SW  Room 4SW-0915 

193

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Washington, DC 20472-3505 
Cell: 202.717.1595 
E-mail: nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING:  This document and attachments are for official use only.  It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information.  This information 
shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee without prior authorization of the originator.  This communication along 
with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and 
legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability with civil and criminal 
penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or 
otherwise use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, February 12, 2019 2:49 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Johnson, Jo Linda <jolinda.johnson@fema.dhs.gov>; Peterkin, 
Donna <donna.peterkin@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas <Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; 
Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
Feb 12th 2019 
On or about August 27th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly SIX (6) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy governing 
this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

194

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 4:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

195

 
 
 
 
 
196

 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Mr. Meindl, 

Oke, Nicole
Wednesday, March 6, 2019 1:48 PM
Meindl, Max
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

I am in training today.  Let’s talk tomorrow.  Did you request fulltime telework?   

Thanks, 

Nicole  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, March 6, 2019 2:45 PM 
To: Oke, Nicole <nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: femamax@gmail.com 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Nicole, 
Why is the RA process so ignored/abused by the process? 
I’ve done everything required on my end yet the “institution” can’t seem to take the request seriously nor process the request 
pursuant to DHS/FEMA policy. 
This seems unjust, unfair and unreasonable to an individual requesting/requiring a timely response to a request. 
Instead of a reasonable accommodation, so I can be allowed to do a couple of hours of telework before driving 60 miles to the 
office, I am required to take “leave without pay” on a regular basis resulting in a diminished paycheck.   
All in all, it seems as if the default position of DHS/FEMA is to stall and/or decline any request, for whatever reason. 
I would expect or request that the process, mine specifically, be looked in to, and to identify process disconnects and put eyes on 
a way to improve the process, especially the timeliness requirements or lack thereof 
According to policy: 
FEMA Manual 1430.1 Chg.1 December 3, 2002 
4-4 
Chapter 5 
Time Frames 
5-1. Processing Requests. FEMA will process requests for reasonable accommodation and provide accommodations, where they are appropriate, 
in as short a time frame as reasonably possible. FEMA recognizes, however, that the time necessary to process a request will depend on the 
nature of the accommodation requested and whether it is necessary to obtain supporting information. Time frames for processing requests and 
providing reasonable accommodation where no supporting information is required are as follows: 
a. Requests from applicants for employment should be expedited when necessary to ensure the applicant’s ability to compete for the position. 
However, these requests should not exceed ten (10) business days. 
b. If a request from an employee is processed by the supervisor, the request should be processed, and the accommodation, if granted, provided 
within 15 business days from the date of receipt of the request. Requests for accommodation should be expedited when the accommodation is 
needed to enable the employee to participate in an Agency activity scheduled to occur in the near future. 
(1) If the decision maker believes that it is necessary to obtain medical information to determine whether the requesting individual has a 
disability and/or to identify the functional limitations, the decision maker will request the information as soon as possible after his or her receipt 
of the request for accommodation. FEMA recognizes that the need for documentation may not become apparent until after the interactive 
process has begun. 
(2) In cases where medical documentation is needed, the accommodation, if granted, will be provided within ten (10) business days for an 
applicant, and within 15 business days for an employee, from the date the decision maker receives the relevant information, absent any 
extenuating circumstances. 
c. Where the Disability Program Manager is the decision maker on a request for reasonable accommodation, he/she will make a decision on the 
request and the  accommodation, if granted, will be provided within 15 business days from the date of the request. If medical documentation is 
necessary, the decision will be made within 15 business days of receipt of the medical information, absent any extenuating circumstances. 

We are going on 132 business days since AUGUST 23rd 2018 and 196 calendar days. 

197

 
 
 
 
 
 
Unreasonable and unnecessary. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Oke, Nicole  
Sent: Monday, March 4, 2019 5:57 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Dear Mr. Meindl, 

I apologize for the delay.  You should have a response by close of business this week. 

Respectfully, 

Nicole  

Nicole Oke 
Informal Unit Chief, Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/Federal Emergency Management Agency 
500 C Street, SW  Room 4SW-0915 
Washington, DC 20472-3505 
Cell: 202.717.1595 
E-mail: nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING:  This document and attachments are for official use only.  It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information.  This information 
shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee without prior authorization of the originator.  This communication along 
with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and 
legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability with civil and criminal 
penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or 
otherwise use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

198

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, February 27, 2019 5:00 PM 
To: Oke, Nicole <nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Johnson, Jo Linda 
<jolinda.johnson@fema.dhs.gov>; Peterkin, Donna <donna.peterkin@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov>; rick@guerradays.com; Slie, Brian <Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie 
<jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Nicole, 
As of this date I’ve yet to receive an answer to my RA request filed in August of 2018.   
I am at a loss trying to understand how FEMA/DHS policy can be so blatantly ignored/violated in such a casual manner by so many. 
My request was based on a serious heart condition requiring a bit of flexibility in my morning schedule to accommodate issues I 
face daily.   
My heart surgery, which was scheduled for 01/25/2019, had to be postponed/rescheduled for a different time, but I am hoping it 
will be soon.   
My simple request to FEMA/DHS was for some understanding and flexibility to assist me over the past 6 months, in a challenging 
time, and the FEMA team, thus far, has deemed me insignificant and not worthy of a response nor consideration of assistance. 
Can you explain this? 

NOTE: Equal Rights Office policy requires the agency to provide requested Reasonable Accommodation within 10 days, barring 
extenuating circumstances. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Oke, Nicole  
Sent: Tuesday, February 12, 2019 2:22 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>; Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Johnson, Jo Linda 
<jolinda.johnson@fema.dhs.gov>; Peterkin, Donna <donna.peterkin@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Dear Mr. Meindl, 

I will research the matter and circle back with a response and next steps.   

199

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Respectfully, 

Nicole  

Nicole Oke 
Informal Unit Chief, Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/Federal Emergency Management Agency 
500 C Street, SW  Room 4SW-0915 
Washington, DC 20472-3505 
Cell: 202.717.1595 
E-mail: nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING:  This document and attachments are for official use only.  It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information.  This information 
shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee without prior authorization of the originator.  This communication along 
with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and 
legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability with civil and criminal 
penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or 
otherwise use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, February 12, 2019 2:49 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Johnson, Jo Linda <jolinda.johnson@fema.dhs.gov>; Peterkin, 
Donna <donna.peterkin@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas <Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; 
Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
Feb 12th 2019 
On or about August 27th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly SIX (6) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy governing 
this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

200

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 4:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

201

 
 
 
 
information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

202

 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Ms. Johnson, 

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, March 6, 2019 1:52 PM
Johnson, Jo Linda
femamax@gmail.com
FW: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

As of this date I’ve yet to receive an answer to my RA request filed in August of 2018.   
I am at a loss trying to understand how FEMA/DHS policy can be so blatantly ignored/violated in such a casual manner by so many. 
My request was based on a serious heart condition requiring a bit of flexibility in my morning schedule to accommodate issues I 
face daily.   
My heart surgery, which was scheduled for 01/25/2019, had to be postponed/rescheduled for a different time, but I am hoping it 
will be soon.   
My simple request to FEMA/DHS was for some understanding and flexibility to assist me over the past 6 months, in a challenging 
time, and the FEMA team, thus far, has deemed me insignificant and not worthy of a response nor consideration of assistance. 
Can you explain this? 
Why is the RA process so ignored/abused by the process? 
I’ve done everything required on my end yet the “institution” can’t seem to take the request seriously nor process the request 
pursuant to DHS/FEMA policy. 
This seems unjust, unfair and unreasonable to an individual requesting/requiring a timely response to a request. 
Instead of a reasonable accommodation, so I can be allowed to do a couple of hours of telework before driving 60 miles to the 
office, I am required to take “leave without pay” on a regular basis resulting in a diminished paycheck.   
All in all, it seems as if the default position of DHS/FEMA is to stall and/or decline any request, for whatever reason. 
I would expect or request that the process, mine specifically, be looked in to, and to identify process disconnects and put eyes on 
a way to improve the process, especially the timeliness requirements or lack thereof 
According to policy: 
FEMA Manual 1430.1 Chg.1 December 3, 2002 
4-4 
Chapter 5 
Time Frames 
5-1. Processing Requests. FEMA will process requests for reasonable accommodation and provide accommodations, where they are appropriate, 
in as short a time frame as reasonably possible. FEMA recognizes, however, that the time necessary to process a request will depend on the 
nature of the accommodation requested and whether it is necessary to obtain supporting information. Time frames for processing requests and 
providing reasonable accommodation where no supporting information is required are as follows: 
a. Requests from applicants for employment should be expedited when necessary to ensure the applicant’s ability to compete for the position. 
However, these requests should not exceed ten (10) business days. 
b. If a request from an employee is processed by the supervisor, the request should be processed, and the accommodation, if granted, provided 
within 15 business days from the date of receipt of the request. Requests for accommodation should be expedited when the accommodation is 
needed to enable the employee to participate in an Agency activity scheduled to occur in the near future. 
(1) If the decision maker believes that it is necessary to obtain medical information to determine whether the requesting individual has a 
disability and/or to identify the functional limitations, the decision maker will request the information as soon as possible after his or her receipt 
of the request for accommodation. FEMA recognizes that the need for documentation may not become apparent until after the interactive 
process has begun. 
(2) In cases where medical documentation is needed, the accommodation, if granted, will be provided within ten (10) business days for an 
applicant, and within 15 business days for an employee, from the date the decision maker receives the relevant information, absent any 
extenuating circumstances. 
c. Where the Disability Program Manager is the decision maker on a request for reasonable accommodation, he/she will make a decision on the 
request and the  accommodation, if granted, will be provided within 15 business days from the date of the request. If medical documentation is 
necessary, the decision will be made within 15 business days of receipt of the medical information, absent any extenuating circumstances. 

We are going on 132 business days since AUGUST 23rd 2018 and 196 calendar days. 
Unreasonable and unnecessary. 

203

 
 
 
NOTE: Equal Rights Office policy requires the agency to provide requested Reasonable Accommodation within 10 days, barring 
extenuating circumstances. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Oke, Nicole  
Sent: Tuesday, February 12, 2019 2:22 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>; Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Johnson, Jo Linda 
<jolinda.johnson@fema.dhs.gov>; Peterkin, Donna <donna.peterkin@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Dear Mr. Meindl, 

I will research the matter and circle back with a response and next steps.   

Respectfully, 

Nicole  

Nicole Oke 
Informal Unit Chief, Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/Federal Emergency Management Agency 
500 C Street, SW  Room 4SW-0915 
Washington, DC 20472-3505 
Cell: 202.717.1595 
E-mail: nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING:  This document and attachments are for official use only.  It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information.  This information 
shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee without prior authorization of the originator.  This communication along 
with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and 
legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability with civil and criminal 
penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or 
otherwise use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

204

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, February 12, 2019 2:49 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Johnson, Jo Linda <jolinda.johnson@fema.dhs.gov>; Peterkin, 
Donna <donna.peterkin@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas <Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; 
Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
Feb 12th 2019 
On or about August 27th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly SIX (6) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy governing 
this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 4:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 

205

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

206

 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, March 6, 2019 2:00 PM
Oke, Nicole
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

No, I specifically requested “Tele-work option when not feeling well” which is typically a couple of hours in the mornings  until my 
heart levels out and/or quits threatening me, (that’s a joke), but depending on many variables, weather, ability to sleep, ability to 
lie down or not.  I need to sit and meditate or do breathing exercises, but for sure I’m not ready to get in a car and drive 60 miles 
in Houston traffic.  BUT, I am able to log in and answer emails, make telephone calls, work in Grants Manager on behalf of my 
applicants.  When all levels out, I get in the car and head to the office to finish my day.  I am a producer and take care of my 
applicants to the point of when management wanted to transfer an applicant to another PDMG they received a letter from the 
applicants congressman stipulating disagreement with that decision.  Lo and behold I was reassigned the applicant.  I do my job, I 
do it well and I was just wanting some accommodation. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Oke, Nicole  
Sent: Wednesday, March 6, 2019 1:48 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Mr. Meindl, 

I am in training today.  Let’s talk tomorrow.  Did you request fulltime telework?   

Thanks, 

Nicole  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, March 6, 2019 2:45 PM 
To: Oke, Nicole <nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: femamax@gmail.com 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Nicole, 
Why is the RA process so ignored/abused by the process? 

207

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I’ve done everything required on my end yet the “institution” can’t seem to take the request seriously nor process the request 
pursuant to DHS/FEMA policy. 
This seems unjust, unfair and unreasonable to an individual requesting/requiring a timely response to a request. 
Instead of a reasonable accommodation, so I can be allowed to do a couple of hours of telework before driving 60 miles to the 
office, I am required to take “leave without pay” on a regular basis resulting in a diminished paycheck.   
All in all, it seems as if the default position of DHS/FEMA is to stall and/or decline any request, for whatever reason. 
I would expect or request that the process, mine specifically, be looked in to, and to identify process disconnects and put eyes on 
a way to improve the process, especially the timeliness requirements or lack thereof 
According to policy: 
FEMA Manual 1430.1 Chg.1 December 3, 2002 
4-4 
Chapter 5 
Time Frames 
5-1. Processing Requests. FEMA will process requests for reasonable accommodation and provide accommodations, where they are appropriate, 
in as short a time frame as reasonably possible. FEMA recognizes, however, that the time necessary to process a request will depend on the 
nature of the accommodation requested and whether it is necessary to obtain supporting information. Time frames for processing requests and 
providing reasonable accommodation where no supporting information is required are as follows: 
a. Requests from applicants for employment should be expedited when necessary to ensure the applicant’s ability to compete for the position. 
However, these requests should not exceed ten (10) business days. 
b. If a request from an employee is processed by the supervisor, the request should be processed, and the accommodation, if granted, provided 
within 15 business days from the date of receipt of the request. Requests for accommodation should be expedited when the accommodation is 
needed to enable the employee to participate in an Agency activity scheduled to occur in the near future. 
(1) If the decision maker believes that it is necessary to obtain medical information to determine whether the requesting individual has a 
disability and/or to identify the functional limitations, the decision maker will request the information as soon as possible after his or her receipt 
of the request for accommodation. FEMA recognizes that the need for documentation may not become apparent until after the interactive 
process has begun. 
(2) In cases where medical documentation is needed, the accommodation, if granted, will be provided within ten (10) business days for an 
applicant, and within 15 business days for an employee, from the date the decision maker receives the relevant information, absent any 
extenuating circumstances. 
c. Where the Disability Program Manager is the decision maker on a request for reasonable accommodation, he/she will make a decision on the 
request and the  accommodation, if granted, will be provided within 15 business days from the date of the request. If medical documentation is 
necessary, the decision will be made within 15 business days of receipt of the medical information, absent any extenuating circumstances. 

We are going on 132 business days since AUGUST 23rd 2018 and 196 calendar days. 
Unreasonable and unnecessary. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Oke, Nicole  
Sent: Monday, March 4, 2019 5:57 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

208

 
 
 
 
Dear Mr. Meindl, 

I apologize for the delay.  You should have a response by close of business this week. 

Respectfully, 

Nicole  

Nicole Oke 
Informal Unit Chief, Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/Federal Emergency Management Agency 
500 C Street, SW  Room 4SW-0915 
Washington, DC 20472-3505 
Cell: 202.717.1595 
E-mail: nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING:  This document and attachments are for official use only.  It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information.  This information 
shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee without prior authorization of the originator.  This communication along 
with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and 
legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability with civil and criminal 
penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or 
otherwise use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, February 27, 2019 5:00 PM 
To: Oke, Nicole <nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Johnson, Jo Linda 
<jolinda.johnson@fema.dhs.gov>; Peterkin, Donna <donna.peterkin@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov>; rick@guerradays.com; Slie, Brian <Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie 
<jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Nicole, 
As of this date I’ve yet to receive an answer to my RA request filed in August of 2018.   
I am at a loss trying to understand how FEMA/DHS policy can be so blatantly ignored/violated in such a casual manner by so many. 
My request was based on a serious heart condition requiring a bit of flexibility in my morning schedule to accommodate issues I 
face daily.   
My heart surgery, which was scheduled for 01/25/2019, had to be postponed/rescheduled for a different time, but I am hoping it 
will be soon.   
My simple request to FEMA/DHS was for some understanding and flexibility to assist me over the past 6 months, in a challenging 
time, and the FEMA team, thus far, has deemed me insignificant and not worthy of a response nor consideration of assistance. 
Can you explain this? 

NOTE: Equal Rights Office policy requires the agency to provide requested Reasonable Accommodation within 10 days, barring 
extenuating circumstances. 

209

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Oke, Nicole  
Sent: Tuesday, February 12, 2019 2:22 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>; Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Johnson, Jo Linda 
<jolinda.johnson@fema.dhs.gov>; Peterkin, Donna <donna.peterkin@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Dear Mr. Meindl, 

I will research the matter and circle back with a response and next steps.   

Respectfully, 

Nicole  

Nicole Oke 
Informal Unit Chief, Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/Federal Emergency Management Agency 
500 C Street, SW  Room 4SW-0915 
Washington, DC 20472-3505 
Cell: 202.717.1595 
E-mail: nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING:  This document and attachments are for official use only.  It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information.  This information 
shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee without prior authorization of the originator.  This communication along 
with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and 
legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability with civil and criminal 
penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or 
otherwise use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

210

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, February 12, 2019 2:49 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Johnson, Jo Linda <jolinda.johnson@fema.dhs.gov>; Peterkin, 
Donna <donna.peterkin@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas <Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; 
Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
Feb 12th 2019 
On or about August 27th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly SIX (6) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy governing 
this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 4:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 

211

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

212

 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, March 6, 2019 2:03 PM
Oke, Nicole
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

I had to submit my FMLA paperwork today, to cover all the bases, to deal with the RA nonactivity, again a penalty option, 
considering it is a no pay option. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Oke, Nicole  
Sent: Wednesday, March 6, 2019 1:48 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Mr. Meindl, 

I am in training today.  Let’s talk tomorrow.  Did you request fulltime telework?   

Thanks, 

Nicole  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, March 6, 2019 2:45 PM 
To: Oke, Nicole <nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: femamax@gmail.com 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Nicole, 
Why is the RA process so ignored/abused by the process? 
I’ve done everything required on my end yet the “institution” can’t seem to take the request seriously nor process the request 
pursuant to DHS/FEMA policy. 
This seems unjust, unfair and unreasonable to an individual requesting/requiring a timely response to a request. 
Instead of a reasonable accommodation, so I can be allowed to do a couple of hours of telework before driving 60 miles to the 
office, I am required to take “leave without pay” on a regular basis resulting in a diminished paycheck.   
All in all, it seems as if the default position of DHS/FEMA is to stall and/or decline any request, for whatever reason. 

213

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I would expect or request that the process, mine specifically, be looked in to, and to identify process disconnects and put eyes on 
a way to improve the process, especially the timeliness requirements or lack thereof 
According to policy: 
FEMA Manual 1430.1 Chg.1 December 3, 2002 
4-4 
Chapter 5 
Time Frames 
5-1. Processing Requests. FEMA will process requests for reasonable accommodation and provide accommodations, where they are appropriate, 
in as short a time frame as reasonably possible. FEMA recognizes, however, that the time necessary to process a request will depend on the 
nature of the accommodation requested and whether it is necessary to obtain supporting information. Time frames for processing requests and 
providing reasonable accommodation where no supporting information is required are as follows: 
a. Requests from applicants for employment should be expedited when necessary to ensure the applicant’s ability to compete for the position. 
However, these requests should not exceed ten (10) business days. 
b. If a request from an employee is processed by the supervisor, the request should be processed, and the accommodation, if granted, provided 
within 15 business days from the date of receipt of the request. Requests for accommodation should be expedited when the accommodation is 
needed to enable the employee to participate in an Agency activity scheduled to occur in the near future. 
(1) If the decision maker believes that it is necessary to obtain medical information to determine whether the requesting individual has a 
disability and/or to identify the functional limitations, the decision maker will request the information as soon as possible after his or her receipt 
of the request for accommodation. FEMA recognizes that the need for documentation may not become apparent until after the interactive 
process has begun. 
(2) In cases where medical documentation is needed, the accommodation, if granted, will be provided within ten (10) business days for an 
applicant, and within 15 business days for an employee, from the date the decision maker receives the relevant information, absent any 
extenuating circumstances. 
c. Where the Disability Program Manager is the decision maker on a request for reasonable accommodation, he/she will make a decision on the 
request and the  accommodation, if granted, will be provided within 15 business days from the date of the request. If medical documentation is 
necessary, the decision will be made within 15 business days of receipt of the medical information, absent any extenuating circumstances. 

We are going on 132 business days since AUGUST 23rd 2018 and 196 calendar days. 
Unreasonable and unnecessary. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Oke, Nicole  
Sent: Monday, March 4, 2019 5:57 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Dear Mr. Meindl, 

I apologize for the delay.  You should have a response by close of business this week. 

Respectfully, 

214

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nicole  

Nicole Oke 
Informal Unit Chief, Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/Federal Emergency Management Agency 
500 C Street, SW  Room 4SW-0915 
Washington, DC 20472-3505 
Cell: 202.717.1595 
E-mail: nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING:  This document and attachments are for official use only.  It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information.  This information 
shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee without prior authorization of the originator.  This communication along 
with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and 
legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability with civil and criminal 
penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or 
otherwise use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, February 27, 2019 5:00 PM 
To: Oke, Nicole <nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Johnson, Jo Linda 
<jolinda.johnson@fema.dhs.gov>; Peterkin, Donna <donna.peterkin@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov>; rick@guerradays.com; Slie, Brian <Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie 
<jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Nicole, 
As of this date I’ve yet to receive an answer to my RA request filed in August of 2018.   
I am at a loss trying to understand how FEMA/DHS policy can be so blatantly ignored/violated in such a casual manner by so many. 
My request was based on a serious heart condition requiring a bit of flexibility in my morning schedule to accommodate issues I 
face daily.   
My heart surgery, which was scheduled for 01/25/2019, had to be postponed/rescheduled for a different time, but I am hoping it 
will be soon.   
My simple request to FEMA/DHS was for some understanding and flexibility to assist me over the past 6 months, in a challenging 
time, and the FEMA team, thus far, has deemed me insignificant and not worthy of a response nor consideration of assistance. 
Can you explain this? 

NOTE: Equal Rights Office policy requires the agency to provide requested Reasonable Accommodation within 10 days, barring 
extenuating circumstances. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 

215

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Oke, Nicole  
Sent: Tuesday, February 12, 2019 2:22 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>; Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Johnson, Jo Linda 
<jolinda.johnson@fema.dhs.gov>; Peterkin, Donna <donna.peterkin@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Dear Mr. Meindl, 

I will research the matter and circle back with a response and next steps.   

Respectfully, 

Nicole  

Nicole Oke 
Informal Unit Chief, Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/Federal Emergency Management Agency 
500 C Street, SW  Room 4SW-0915 
Washington, DC 20472-3505 
Cell: 202.717.1595 
E-mail: nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING:  This document and attachments are for official use only.  It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information.  This information 
shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee without prior authorization of the originator.  This communication along 
with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and 
legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability with civil and criminal 
penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or 
otherwise use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, February 12, 2019 2:49 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Johnson, Jo Linda <jolinda.johnson@fema.dhs.gov>; Peterkin, 

216

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Donna <donna.peterkin@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas <Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; 
Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
Feb 12th 2019 
On or about August 27th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly SIX (6) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy governing 
this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 4:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 

217

 
 
 
 
 
 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

218

 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:
Attachments:

Max, 

McAllister, Jamie
Friday, March 8, 2019 7:23 AM
Meindl, Max
Nguyen, Tam
RA Request Response
Meindl_1stLineDecisionFTTWRequest - Oke review (002) to JLJ.pdf

Please see response attached.  

Jamie McAllister 
Deputy Infrastructure Branch Director  
DR 4332 TX JFO Austin 
Region 6 Infrastructure Branch 
DHS/FEMA 
(202) 709-0851 Cell 
jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov 

219

 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

FYI, confidential 

Meindl, Max
Friday, March 8, 2019 10:47 AM
TERRY, DETRA S.
FW: RA Request Response
Meindl_1stLineDecisionFTTWRequest - Oke review (002) to JLJ.pdf

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: McAllister, Jamie  
Sent: Friday, March 8, 2019 7:23 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Nguyen, Tam <Tam.Nguyen@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA Request Response 

Max, 

Please see response attached.  

Jamie McAllister 
Deputy Infrastructure Branch Director  
DR 4332 TX JFO Austin 
Region 6 Infrastructure Branch 
DHS/FEMA 
(202) 709-0851 Cell 
jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov 

220

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, June 26, 2019 2:22 PM
femamax@gmail.com
FMLA
Electronic Code of Federal Regulations-PART 825—THE FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE 
ACT OF 1993.pdf

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

1

 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, June 26, 2019 2:06 PM
Alexander, Dennis
RE: WebTA

FYI: 
From: Gause, Jacqueline  
Sent: Tuesday, May 21, 2019 10:04 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable accommodation  

Good morning Max,  

I believe a little while back you requested to work reduced hours due to medical restrictions. I have reached out to ERO to 
get more guidance on what employees can do in situations where a supervisor/leadership initially denies an alternative 
work schedule that was due to medical reason. If you still need or wish to pursue an alternate work schedule through the 
reasonable accommodation route you can reach out to ERO for more guidance.  

Charise Scott - 202-856-2114 
Tam Nguyen - 609-508-2673 

Regards,  

Jacqueline Gause, MSc 
Human Resources 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Department of Homeland Security 
Hurricane Harvey-DR4332-TX 
Texas Recovery Office  
Houston, TX 
Mobile: 202-322-6241 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 

2

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Alexander, Dennis  
Sent: Wednesday, June 26, 2019 1:53 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: WebTA 

FYI, maybe you know this, but FMLA is for a long term out of office, not for a few hours here or there. 

Thanks, 
Dennis 

Dennis J. Alexander, P.E. 
Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
Disaster DR4332 TX-- Harvey 
TRO TX Harris County Branch II 
8332 Willow Place Drive South 
Houston, TX 77070 
281-897-2017 Desk Phone 
737-230-8182 Cell Phone 
Dennis.alexander@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, June 26, 2019 1:47 PM 
To: Alexander, Dennis <dennis.alexander@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: WebTA 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

3

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Gause, Jacqueline  
Sent: Wednesday, May 29, 2019 9:56 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>; Atchison, Randy <Randy.Atchison@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: WebTA 

Good morning,  

FMLA does not carry any leave. FMLA allows an employee to take up to 480 hours of unpaid for a personal or family 
medical situation.  

Excerpt from OPM: 
Under the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (FMLA), most Federal employees are entitled to a total of up to 12 
workweeks of unpaid leave during any 12-month period. 

An employee may elect to substitute annual leave and/or sick leave, consistent with current laws and OPM's 
regulations for using annual and sick leave, for any unpaid leave under the FMLA.  

The employee can request FMLA LWOP, but will not receive any compensation. If the employee wishes to be paid while 
out on leave they will need to use their annual or sick leave with the FMLA code.  

If you have additional questions or need me to go into further detail please let me know.  

Regards,  

Jacqueline Gause, MSc 
Human Resources 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Department of Homeland Security 
Hurricane Harvey-DR4332-TX 
Texas Recovery Office  
Houston, TX 
Mobile: 202-322-6241 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Friday, May 24, 2019 9:39 AM 
To: Atchison, Randy <Randy.Atchison@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov>; Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: WebTA 

4

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Randy, 
My understanding is that with approved MFLA I am not required to use up my sick days or annual leave. 
I requested MFLA leave without pay which I have been doing for several weeks now. 
Please advise soonest. 

“Cannot take TWOP until all your leave has been used. Also please put the hours in the day block of the calendar. Thank You Randy Atchison” 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

5

 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, June 26, 2019 2:01 PM
Alexander, Dennis
RE: WebTA

6

  
§825.202   Intermittent leave or reduced leave schedule. 

(a) Definition. FMLA leave may be taken intermittently or on a reduced leave schedule under certain circumstances. 
Intermittent leave is FMLA leave taken in separate blocks of time due to a single qualifying reason. A reduced leave 
schedule is a leave schedule that reduces an employee's usual number of working hours per workweek, or hours per 
workday. A reduced leave schedule is a change in the employee's schedule for a period of time, normally from full-time 
to part-time. 

(b) Medical necessity. For intermittent leave or leave on a reduced leave schedule taken because of one's own serious 
health condition, to care for a spouse, parent, son, or daughter with a serious health condition, or to care for a covered 
servicemember with a serious injury or illness, there must be a medical need for leave and it must be that such medical 
need can be best accommodated through an intermittent or reduced leave schedule. The treatment regimen and other 
information described in the certification of a serious health condition and in the certification of a serious injury or 
illness, if required by the employer, addresses the medical necessity of intermittent leave or leave on a reduced leave 
schedule. See §§825.306, 825.310. Leave may be taken intermittently or on a reduced leave schedule when medically 
necessary for planned and/or unanticipated medical treatment of a serious health condition or of a covered 
servicemember's serious injury or illness, or for recovery from treatment or recovery from a serious health condition or 
a covered servicemember's serious injury or illness. It may also be taken to provide care or psychological comfort to a 
covered family member with a serious health condition or a covered servicemember with a serious injury or illness. 

(1) Intermittent leave may be taken for a serious health condition of a spouse, parent, son, or daughter, for the 
employee's own serious health condition, or a serious injury or illness of a covered servicemember which requires 
treatment by a health care provider periodically, rather than for one continuous period of time, and may include leave 
of periods from an hour or more to several weeks. Examples of intermittent leave would include leave taken on an 
occasional basis for medical appointments, or leave taken several days at a time spread over a period of six months, 
such as for chemotherapy. A pregnant employee may take leave intermittently for prenatal examinations or for her own 
condition, such as for periods of severe morning sickness. An example of an employee taking leave on a reduced leave 

7

 
 
schedule is an employee who is recovering from a serious health condition and is not strong enough to work a full-time 
schedule. 

(2) Intermittent or reduced schedule leave may be taken for absences where the employee or family member is 
incapacitated or unable to perform the essential functions of the position because of a chronic serious health condition 
or a serious injury or illness of a covered servicemember, even if he or she does not receive treatment by a health care 
provider. See §§825.113 and 825.127. 

(c) Birth or placement. When leave is taken after the birth of a healthy child or placement of a healthy child for adoption 
or foster care, an employee may take leave intermittently or on a reduced leave schedule only if the employer agrees. 
Such a schedule reduction might occur, for example, where an employee, with the employer's agreement, works part-
time after the birth of a child, or takes leave in several segments. The employer's agreement is not required, however, 
for leave during which the expectant mother has a serious health condition in connection with the birth of her child or if 
the newborn child has a serious health condition. See §825.204 for rules governing transfer to an alternative position 
that better accommodates intermittent leave. See also §825.120 (pregnancy) and §825.121 (adoption and foster care). 

(d) Qualifying exigency. Leave due to a qualifying exigency may be taken on an intermittent or reduced leave schedule 
basis. 

[78 FR 8902, Feb. 6, 2013, as amended at 80 FR 10001, Feb. 25, 2015] 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Alexander, Dennis  
Sent: Wednesday, June 26, 2019 1:53 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: WebTA 

FYI, maybe you know this, but FMLA is for a long term out of office, not for a few hours here or there. 

Thanks, 
Dennis 

8

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dennis J. Alexander, P.E. 
Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
Disaster DR4332 TX-- Harvey 
TRO TX Harris County Branch II 
8332 Willow Place Drive South 
Houston, TX 77070 
281-897-2017 Desk Phone 
737-230-8182 Cell Phone 
Dennis.alexander@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, June 26, 2019 1:47 PM 
To: Alexander, Dennis <dennis.alexander@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: WebTA 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Gause, Jacqueline  
Sent: Wednesday, May 29, 2019 9:56 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>; Atchison, Randy <Randy.Atchison@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: WebTA 

Good morning,  

FMLA does not carry any leave. FMLA allows an employee to take up to 480 hours of unpaid for a personal or family 
medical situation.  

9

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Excerpt from OPM: 
Under the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (FMLA), most Federal employees are entitled to a total of up to 12 
workweeks of unpaid leave during any 12-month period. 

An employee may elect to substitute annual leave and/or sick leave, consistent with current laws and OPM's 
regulations for using annual and sick leave, for any unpaid leave under the FMLA.  

The employee can request FMLA LWOP, but will not receive any compensation. If the employee wishes to be paid while 
out on leave they will need to use their annual or sick leave with the FMLA code.  

If you have additional questions or need me to go into further detail please let me know.  

Regards,  

Jacqueline Gause, MSc 
Human Resources 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Department of Homeland Security 
Hurricane Harvey-DR4332-TX 
Texas Recovery Office  
Houston, TX 
Mobile: 202-322-6241 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Friday, May 24, 2019 9:39 AM 
To: Atchison, Randy <Randy.Atchison@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov>; Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: WebTA 

Randy, 
My understanding is that with approved MFLA I am not required to use up my sick days or annual leave. 
I requested MFLA leave without pay which I have been doing for several weeks now. 
Please advise soonest. 

“Cannot take TWOP until all your leave has been used. Also please put the hours in the day block of the calendar. Thank You Randy Atchison” 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 

10

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

11

 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, June 26, 2019 1:53 PM
Alexander, Dennis
RE: WebTA

It allows for reduced hours. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Alexander, Dennis  
Sent: Wednesday, June 26, 2019 1:53 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: WebTA 

FYI, maybe you know this, but FMLA is for a long term out of office, not for a few hours here or there. 

Thanks, 
Dennis 

Dennis J. Alexander, P.E. 
Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
Disaster DR4332 TX-- Harvey 
TRO TX Harris County Branch II 
8332 Willow Place Drive South 
Houston, TX 77070 
281-897-2017 Desk Phone 
737-230-8182 Cell Phone 
Dennis.alexander@fema.dhs.gov 

12

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, June 26, 2019 1:47 PM 
To: Alexander, Dennis <dennis.alexander@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: WebTA 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Gause, Jacqueline  
Sent: Wednesday, May 29, 2019 9:56 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>; Atchison, Randy <Randy.Atchison@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: WebTA 

Good morning,  

FMLA does not carry any leave. FMLA allows an employee to take up to 480 hours of unpaid for a personal or family 
medical situation.  

Excerpt from OPM: 
Under the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (FMLA), most Federal employees are entitled to a total of up to 12 
workweeks of unpaid leave during any 12-month period. 

An employee may elect to substitute annual leave and/or sick leave, consistent with current laws and OPM's 
regulations for using annual and sick leave, for any unpaid leave under the FMLA.  

The employee can request FMLA LWOP, but will not receive any compensation. If the employee wishes to be paid while 
out on leave they will need to use their annual or sick leave with the FMLA code.  

If you have additional questions or need me to go into further detail please let me know.  

13

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regards,  

Jacqueline Gause, MSc 
Human Resources 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Department of Homeland Security 
Hurricane Harvey-DR4332-TX 
Texas Recovery Office  
Houston, TX 
Mobile: 202-322-6241 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Friday, May 24, 2019 9:39 AM 
To: Atchison, Randy <Randy.Atchison@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov>; Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: WebTA 

Randy, 
My understanding is that with approved MFLA I am not required to use up my sick days or annual leave. 
I requested MFLA leave without pay which I have been doing for several weeks now. 
Please advise soonest. 

“Cannot take TWOP until all your leave has been used. Also please put the hours in the day block of the calendar. Thank You Randy Atchison” 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

14

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Alexander, Dennis
Wednesday, June 26, 2019 1:53 PM
Meindl, Max
RE: WebTA

FYI, maybe you know this, but FMLA is for a long term out of office, not for a few hours here or there. 

Thanks, 
Dennis 

Dennis J. Alexander, P.E. 
Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
Disaster DR4332 TX-- Harvey 
TRO TX Harris County Branch II 
8332 Willow Place Drive South 
Houston, TX 77070 
281-897-2017 Desk Phone 
737-230-8182 Cell Phone 
Dennis.alexander@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, June 26, 2019 1:47 PM 
To: Alexander, Dennis <dennis.alexander@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: WebTA 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

15

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Gause, Jacqueline  
Sent: Wednesday, May 29, 2019 9:56 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>; Atchison, Randy <Randy.Atchison@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: WebTA 

Good morning,  

FMLA does not carry any leave. FMLA allows an employee to take up to 480 hours of unpaid for a personal or family 
medical situation.  

Excerpt from OPM: 
Under the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (FMLA), most Federal employees are entitled to a total of up to 12 
workweeks of unpaid leave during any 12-month period. 

An employee may elect to substitute annual leave and/or sick leave, consistent with current laws and OPM's 
regulations for using annual and sick leave, for any unpaid leave under the FMLA.  

The employee can request FMLA LWOP, but will not receive any compensation. If the employee wishes to be paid while 
out on leave they will need to use their annual or sick leave with the FMLA code.  

If you have additional questions or need me to go into further detail please let me know.  

Regards,  

Jacqueline Gause, MSc 
Human Resources 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Department of Homeland Security 
Hurricane Harvey-DR4332-TX 
Texas Recovery Office  
Houston, TX 
Mobile: 202-322-6241 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Friday, May 24, 2019 9:39 AM 
To: Atchison, Randy <Randy.Atchison@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov>; Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: WebTA 

16

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Randy, 
My understanding is that with approved MFLA I am not required to use up my sick days or annual leave. 
I requested MFLA leave without pay which I have been doing for several weeks now. 
Please advise soonest. 

“Cannot take TWOP until all your leave has been used. Also please put the hours in the day block of the calendar. Thank You Randy Atchison” 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

17

 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, June 26, 2019 1:51 PM
Alexander, Dennis
FW: WebTa

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Agaiby, Angela  
Sent: Tuesday, May 14, 2019 9:33 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: WebTa 

Good morning,  

Please submit your oLWOP/FMLA request in in WebTA under leave a premium pay for 05/09/19 and 05/10/19.  Once 
your supervisor has approved the request please go into the system and re-affirm your time. Then I can validate.  

Please let me know if you have any questions.  

Thank you 

Angela Agaiby 
PA Operations Support Specialist 
DR-4332 
8223 Willow Place Dr. S 
Houston, TX 77070 
512-574-7612 
Angela.Agaiby@FEMA.DHS.GOV 

18

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19

 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, June 26, 2019 1:47 PM
Alexander, Dennis
FW: WebTA

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Gause, Jacqueline  
Sent: Wednesday, May 29, 2019 9:56 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>; Atchison, Randy <Randy.Atchison@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: WebTA 

Good morning,  

FMLA does not carry any leave. FMLA allows an employee to take up to 480 hours of unpaid for a personal or family 
medical situation.  

Excerpt from OPM: 
Under the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (FMLA), most Federal employees are entitled to a total of up to 12 
workweeks of unpaid leave during any 12-month period. 

An employee may elect to substitute annual leave and/or sick leave, consistent with current laws and OPM's 
regulations for using annual and sick leave, for any unpaid leave under the FMLA.  

The employee can request FMLA LWOP, but will not receive any compensation. If the employee wishes to be paid while 
out on leave they will need to use their annual or sick leave with the FMLA code.  

If you have additional questions or need me to go into further detail please let me know.  

Regards,  

20

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jacqueline Gause, MSc 
Human Resources 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Department of Homeland Security 
Hurricane Harvey-DR4332-TX 
Texas Recovery Office  
Houston, TX 
Mobile: 202-322-6241 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Friday, May 24, 2019 9:39 AM 
To: Atchison, Randy <Randy.Atchison@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov>; Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: WebTA 

Randy, 
My understanding is that with approved MFLA I am not required to use up my sick days or annual leave. 
I requested MFLA leave without pay which I have been doing for several weeks now. 
Please advise soonest. 

“Cannot take TWOP until all your leave has been used. Also please put the hours in the day block of the calendar. Thank You Randy Atchison” 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

21

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, June 26, 2019 1:44 PM
Alexander, Dennis
FW: Timesheet FMLA

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Gause, Jacqueline  
Sent: Tuesday, April 23, 2019 3:10 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Obasa, Babajide <babajide.obasa@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Timesheet FMLA 

Good afternoon,  

I will need you to provide me with your paystub showing your hours worked. You can obtain this information from my 
epp. I need you to submit paystub from when you converted to CORE, PP25 (2018), and PP 7 (2019).  

Please let me know if you have any other questions.  

Regards,  

Jacqueline Gause, MSc 
Human Resources 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Department of Homeland Security 
Hurricane Harvey-DR4332-TX 
Texas Recovery Office  
Houston, TX 
Mobile: 202-322-6241 

22

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, April 23, 2019 1:30 PM 
To: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Obasa, Babajide <babajide.obasa@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Timesheet FMLA 

Reservist since 08/2017. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Gause, Jacqueline  
Sent: Monday, April 22, 2019 4:21 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Obasa, Babajide <babajide.obasa@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Timesheet FMLA 

Good afternoon Max,  

Prior to becoming a CORE for the TRO were you employed with FEMA? Currently, you have been with the TRO since 
June 2018 thus, you do not meet the 1 yr requirement for FMLA. If you have prior time with FEMA as a CORE, reservist, 
or local hire please let me know so that I can verify the time. 

Regards,  

Jacqueline Gause, MSc 
Human Resources 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Department of Homeland Security 
Hurricane Harvey-DR4332-TX 
Texas Recovery Office  
Houston, TX 
Mobile: 202-322-6241 

23

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Monday, April 22, 2019 10:39 AM 
To: Guelzow, Nicole <nicole.guelzow@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Obasa, Babajide <babajide.obasa@fema.dhs.gov>; David, 
Patricia <Patricia.David@fema.dhs.gov>; Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Timesheet FMLA 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Guelzow, Nicole  
Sent: Tuesday, April 2, 2019 4:51 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Obasa, Babajide <babajide.obasa@fema.dhs.gov>; David, 
Patricia <Patricia.David@fema.dhs.gov>; Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Timesheet FMLA 
Importance: High 

Good afternoon Max, 

I am performing timekeeping duties while your regular timekeeper is out of the office.  In reviewing your timesheet, I 
see that you are claiming LWOP – FMLA.   

Have you been approved for FMLA?   

If you have, I apologize as the paperwork was not provided to the Austin office.  If not, the leave category should be 
changed to LWOP until you receive approval. 

Please let us know the status of your FMLA application as soon as possible so that we can move forward with your 
timesheet certification. 

Respectfully, 

Nicole Guelzow, MPA 
Administrative Specialist (HR) 
Texas Recovery Office 

24

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11000 N Interstate 35 
Austin, TX 78753 
(202) 718-1306 cell  

25

 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, June 26, 2019 1:41 PM
Alexander, Dennis
FW: FMLA

Importance:

High

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Obasa, Babajide  
Sent: Tuesday, April 23, 2019 10:05 AM 
To: Silva, Patricia <patricia.silva@fema.dhs.gov>; Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: FMLA 
Importance: High 

Hello and Happy Tuesday! 

Yes Patricia…Jackie will follow up with Mr. Meindl as to the appropriate next steps. 

Thank you so much😊 

J- 

From: Silva, Patricia  
Sent: Tuesday, April 23, 2019 6:36 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Obasa, Babajide <babajide.obasa@fema.dhs.gov>; Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: FMLA 

Good morning Mr. Meindl, 

26

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I have reviewed your paperwork and all seems in order. I have copied Jide Obasa and Jacqueline Gause in this email as 
they are now the leads for FMLA in the TRO. Please consult with them on next steps. 

Jide/Jackie- could you please inform Mr. Meindl of next steps. 

Thank you, 

Patricia Silva 
Employee/Labor Relations Specialist 
Office of the Chief Component Human Capital Officer (OCCHCO)| FEMA|DHS 
500 C. Street SW/Washington, DC, 7th Floor  
Email: patricia.silva@fema.dhs.gov 
Office: 202. 212. 5238 
Mobile: 202.368.7217 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Monday, April 22, 2019 11:40 AM 
To: Silva, Patricia <patricia.silva@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: FMLA 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Silva, Patricia  
Sent: Wednesday, March 13, 2019 5:57 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: FMLA 

Good morning Mr. Meindl, 

You need to communicate to your supervisor of record the need take FMLA leave at least 30 calendar days before the 
start of the planned absence. I have attached the Absence and Leave Manual for your review. Chapter 5 addresses 
FMLA.  

27

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I have also received the medical certification in connection with your request for FMLA leave.; however, the following 
required information is missing from the medical certification or is vague and needs clarification:  

1. 

It is not clear whether you need FMLA leave intermittently or for a continuous period of time or both.  

a. 

b. 

If your FMLA leave is for a continuous period of time, your doctor needs to state so. In the medical 
documentation you provided it only states “a few days after heart surgery”.  In addition, the your doctor 
will need to include the date of your surgery. 
If your request is for intermittent leave for a planned medical treatment, the dates (actual or estimates) 
on which such treatment is expected to be given, the duration of such treatment, and the period of 
recovery, if any, before you would be able to return to work; 

2.  Your medical provider stated that your condition will cause episodic flare ups; however, the certification is 

missing the frequency of the flare ups. The medical certification needs to include an estimate of the frequency 
of the flare ups and the duration of related incapacity that you may have over the next 6 months (Part B, 
question #7). 

Please be advised that the complete medical documentation is due 15 calendar days from this email.  

Let me know if you have any questions. 

Thank you, 

Patricia Silva 
Employee/Labor Relations Specialist 
Office of the Chief Component Human Capital Officer (OCCHCO)| FEMA|DHS 
500 C. Street SW/Washington, DC, 7th Floor  
Email: patricia.silva@fema.dhs.gov 
Office: 202. 212. 5238 
Mobile: 202.368.7217 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, March 12, 2019 3:13 PM 
To: Silva, Patricia <patricia.silva@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: femamax@gmail.com; rick@guerradays.com 
Subject: RE: FMLA 

Jamie McAllister 
Deputy Infrastructure Branch Director  
DR 4332 TX JFO Austin 
Region 6 Infrastructure Branch 
DHS/FEMA 
(202) 709-0851 Cell 
jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov 

No, Jamie is  not aware of the request that I am aware of. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 

28

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Silva, Patricia  
Sent: Tuesday, March 12, 2019 2:02 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: FMLA 

Mr. Meindl, 

Who is your supervisor of record? Are they aware of your FMLA request? 

Patricia Silva 
Employee/Labor Relations Specialist 
Office of the Chief Component Human Capital Officer (OCCHCO)| FEMA|DHS 
500 C. Street SW/Washington, DC, 7th Floor  
Email: patricia.silva@fema.dhs.gov 
Office: 202. 212. 5238 
Mobile: 202.368.7217 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, March 6, 2019 2:29 PM 
To: Silva, Patricia <patricia.silva@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: femamax@gmail.com 
Subject: RE: FMLA 

Document attached. 
Please advise as to the procedure subsequent the submission of this document to you. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

29

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From: Silva, Patricia  
Sent: Wednesday, March 6, 2019 1:03 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: FMLA 

Yes, that is correct.  

Patricia Silva 
Employee/Labor Relations Specialist 
Office of the Chief Component Human Capital Officer (OCCHCO)| FEMA|DHS 
500 C. Street SW/Washington, DC, 7th Floor  
Email: patricia.silva@fema.dhs.gov 
Office: 202. 212. 5238 
Mobile: 202.368.7217 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, March 6, 2019 11:56 AM 
To: Silva, Patricia <patricia.silva@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FMLA 

I have been advised that you’re the individual I’m supposed to send my FMLA forms to. 
Is that correct? 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

30

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:

Subject:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, October 23, 2019 1:37 PM
Gause, Jacqueline; David, Patricia
Wick, Timothy; Terry, Detra; Alexander, Dennis; brent@guerradays.com; FEMA-
EqualRights
RE: FMLA Recertification - M. Meindl

Thanks JG, no problem, I’m working on an update with my providers, to appropriately capture/document/list all of the 
existing/new/challenging/interesting, issues that have manifested since the surgery. Appreciate your assistance.. 

___________________________________ 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.   
It may contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).   
The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to 
be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov>  
Sent: Wednesday, October 23, 2019 1:09 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>; David, Patricia <Patricia.David@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Wick, Timothy <Timothy.Wick@fema.dhs.gov>; Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov>; Alexander, Dennis 
<dennis.alexander@fema.dhs.gov>; brent@guerradays.com; FEMA-EqualRights <FEMA-EqualRights@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: FMLA Recertification - M. Meindl 

Good afternoon,  

The FMLA update process being applied in this situation is consistent with policy. Your approved FMLA condition of 
record is the matter being addressed as it relates to the updates being requested. You have said in your response that 
you are not scheduled to see the physician until next year and that you will request an appointment and attempt to get 
one as soon as possible. I will follow up with you in seven (7) days to see if you were able to get an appointment for this 
matter.  

In the meantime I will recommend to your supervisor to continue to approve your current FMLA request for the said 
condition until you have an appointment scheduled. The specifics of the concerns is that your current FMLA is approved 
for 1-3 occurrences every month and you have exceeded the frequency so your management is attempting to obtain 
updated information.  

Thanks for your cooperation with this matter. Please let me know if you have additional questions or concerns.  

1

 
   
 
 
 
 
 
Regards,  

Jacqueline Gause, MSc 
Human Resources 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Department of Homeland Security 
Hurricane Harvey-DR4332-TX 
Texas Recovery Office  
Houston, TX 
Mobile: 202-322-6241 

From: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>  
Sent: Tuesday, October 22, 2019 4:22 PM 
To: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov>; David, Patricia <Patricia.David@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Wick, Timothy <Timothy.Wick@fema.dhs.gov>; Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov>; Alexander, Dennis 
<dennis.alexander@fema.dhs.gov>; brent@guerradays.com; FEMA-EqualRights <FEMA-EqualRights@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: FMLA Recertification - M. Meindl 

JG, 
My next appointment with the VA is 10/29/2019 with the ENT (ear, nose, throat) group at the DeBakey VA hospital to 
attempt to ascertain the source for my recurring dizzy spells. 
My next appointment with my primary care physician is next Feb, 2020. 
My next appointment with my pulmonary care specialist for my COPD (Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease) is also 
next year. 
I will do an online request to see my primary at the Katy VA outpatient clinic, but I’m not sure if that can happen within 15 
days, it is the VA, so nothing is for certain. 
I will also attempt to get an appointment with my primary care private physician in Bellville. 
I must admit that as an senior citizen and as an individual who has identified, in the onboarding process, as an individual 
with a disability and when factoring in the very problematic heart surgery and subsequent associated health issues, I am 
concerned about the way the institution and/or individuals within the institution, treat those identified as disabled, more 
specifically, myself.   
If my work was lacking, maybe I could understand, but it isn’t and I don’t understand.   
It does seem that personalities have drifted in to the equation, in my opinion. 
I appreciate your assistance and efforts with my disability and during my recovery but, I must admit that it has been an 
extremely distasteful experience with other FEMA personnel. 

I will endeavor to get the paperwork returned in a timely manner but I am concerned about the 15 day window. 

Please advise. 

___________________________________ 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

2

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.   
It may contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).   
The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to 
be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov>  
Sent: Tuesday, October 22, 2019 3:13 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Wick, Timothy <Timothy.Wick@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FMLA Recertification - M. Meindl 

Good afternoon Max,  

On May 1, 2019 you were initially approved for FMLA due to a serious/chronic health condition.  Given that it has now 
been more than thirty (30) calendar days since your last medical update for your current FMLA condition, I am requesting 
that you provide me with an FMLA recertification as it relates to your current FMLA condition of record.  The 
recertification is now necessary to ensure that the workload on your team can be planned and managed effectively while 
assisting you during your time of recovery.  Therefore, I am requesting that you work with your physician to respond to 
all questions where appropriate especially those related to the questions identified below. These questions are not separate 
and apart from the recertification form but can be responded to within the context of the questions already provided on the 
form.  (29 CFR 825.308(a), permits recertification every 30 days for chronic or permanent/long-term conditions.)   

Purpose of this FMLA Recertification Update: 

  1. To validate if you are continuing to see the physician for the specific condition listed on your FMLA application dated 
and signed by your physician, on 4/11/2019.       

  2.  Request that you provide an estimate of the duration of your condition & if you will be incapacitated for a single 
continuous period of time.  (See questions #1 & #4). 

  3.  Request that you specify what dates, if any, you will have planned appointments within the next 30 days. (See 
Question #5) 

  4.  Request that your physician state whether or not you require care on an intermittent or reduced schedule basis, 
including any time for recovery.  (See Question #6) 

  5.  Request that your physician provide an estimate of when you will have flare-ups during your recovery period (if 
known) that will prevent you from performing your job functions. (See question #7). 

Your health remains of paramount concern to me as well as our mission.  My goal remains to work cooperatively with 
you and your physician in a manner which affords you the best opportunity to recover and return to full time employment 
status.  However, failure to provide this requested FMLA Recertification information within fifteen (15) working days of 
receipt will result in the denial of any FMLA related leave until the information is provided.  

If you experience difficulty providing this information within the specified period, please see me, or in my absence 
Patricia David, and provide a brief written statement documenting your hardship and your request for extension will be 
responded to within three (3) working days. 

3

   
 
 
Regards, 

Jacqueline Gause, MSc 
Human Resources 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Department of Homeland Security 
Hurricane Harvey-DR4332-TX 
Texas Recovery Office  
Houston, TX 
Mobile: 202-322-6241 

4

 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:

Subject:

Good afternoon,  

Gause, Jacqueline
Wednesday, October 23, 2019 1:09 PM
Meindl, Max; David, Patricia
Wick, Timothy; Terry, Detra; Alexander, Dennis; brent@guerradays.com; FEMA-
EqualRights
RE: FMLA Recertification - M. Meindl

The FMLA update process being applied in this situation is consistent with policy. Your approved FMLA condition of 
record is the matter being addressed as it relates to the updates being requested. You have said in your response that 
you are not scheduled to see the physician until next year and that you will request an appointment and attempt to get 
one as soon as possible. I will follow up with you in seven (7) days to see if you were able to get an appointment for this 
matter.  

In the meantime I will recommend to your supervisor to continue to approve your current FMLA request for the said 
condition until you have an appointment scheduled. The specifics of the concerns is that your current FMLA is approved 
for 1-3 occurrences every month and you have exceeded the frequency so your management is attempting to obtain 
updated information.  

Thanks for your cooperation with this matter. Please let me know if you have additional questions or concerns.  

Regards,  

Jacqueline Gause, MSc 
Human Resources 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Department of Homeland Security 
Hurricane Harvey-DR4332-TX 
Texas Recovery Office  
Houston, TX 
Mobile: 202-322-6241 

From: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>  
Sent: Tuesday, October 22, 2019 4:22 PM 
To: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov>; David, Patricia <Patricia.David@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Wick, Timothy <Timothy.Wick@fema.dhs.gov>; Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov>; Alexander, Dennis 
<dennis.alexander@fema.dhs.gov>; brent@guerradays.com; FEMA-EqualRights <FEMA-EqualRights@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: FMLA Recertification - M. Meindl 

JG, 
My next appointment with the VA is 10/29/2019 with the ENT (ear, nose, throat) group at the DeBakey VA hospital to 
attempt to ascertain the source for my recurring dizzy spells. 
My next appointment with my primary care physician is next Feb, 2020. 
My next appointment with my pulmonary care specialist for my COPD (Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease) is also 
next year. 

5

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I will do an online request to see my primary at the Katy VA outpatient clinic, but I’m not sure if that can happen within 15 
days, it is the VA, so nothing is for certain. 
I will also attempt to get an appointment with my primary care private physician in Bellville. 
I must admit that as an senior citizen and as an individual who has identified, in the onboarding process, as an individual 
with a disability and when factoring in the very problematic heart surgery and subsequent associated health issues, I am 
concerned about the way the institution and/or individuals within the institution, treat those identified as disabled, more 
specifically, myself.   
If my work was lacking, maybe I could understand, but it isn’t and I don’t understand.   
It does seem that personalities have drifted in to the equation, in my opinion. 
I appreciate your assistance and efforts with my disability and during my recovery but, I must admit that it has been an 
extremely distasteful experience with other FEMA personnel. 

I will endeavor to get the paperwork returned in a timely manner but I am concerned about the 15 day window. 

Please advise. 

___________________________________ 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.   
It may contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).   
The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to 
be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov>  
Sent: Tuesday, October 22, 2019 3:13 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Wick, Timothy <Timothy.Wick@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FMLA Recertification - M. Meindl 

Good afternoon Max,  

On May 1, 2019 you were initially approved for FMLA due to a serious/chronic health condition.  Given that it has now 
been more than thirty (30) calendar days since your last medical update for your current FMLA condition, I am requesting 
that you provide me with an FMLA recertification as it relates to your current FMLA condition of record.  The 
recertification is now necessary to ensure that the workload on your team can be planned and managed effectively while 
assisting you during your time of recovery.  Therefore, I am requesting that you work with your physician to respond to 
all questions where appropriate especially those related to the questions identified below. These questions are not separate 
and apart from the recertification form but can be responded to within the context of the questions already provided on the 
form.  (29 CFR 825.308(a), permits recertification every 30 days for chronic or permanent/long-term conditions.)   

Purpose of this FMLA Recertification Update: 

6

 
 
 
   
 
 
  1. To validate if you are continuing to see the physician for the specific condition listed on your FMLA application dated 
and signed by your physician, on 4/11/2019.       

  2.  Request that you provide an estimate of the duration of your condition & if you will be incapacitated for a single 
continuous period of time.  (See questions #1 & #4). 

  3.  Request that you specify what dates, if any, you will have planned appointments within the next 30 days. (See 
Question #5) 

  4.  Request that your physician state whether or not you require care on an intermittent or reduced schedule basis, 
including any time for recovery.  (See Question #6) 

  5.  Request that your physician provide an estimate of when you will have flare-ups during your recovery period (if 
known) that will prevent you from performing your job functions. (See question #7). 

Your health remains of paramount concern to me as well as our mission.  My goal remains to work cooperatively with 
you and your physician in a manner which affords you the best opportunity to recover and return to full time employment 
status.  However, failure to provide this requested FMLA Recertification information within fifteen (15) working days of 
receipt will result in the denial of any FMLA related leave until the information is provided.  

If you experience difficulty providing this information within the specified period, please see me, or in my absence 
Patricia David, and provide a brief written statement documenting your hardship and your request for extension will be 
responded to within three (3) working days. 

Regards, 

Jacqueline Gause, MSc 
Human Resources 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Department of Homeland Security 
Hurricane Harvey-DR4332-TX 
Texas Recovery Office  
Houston, TX 
Mobile: 202-322-6241 

7

 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Cooley, Sandra
Tuesday, October 22, 2019 5:09 PM
Meindl, Max
femamax@gmail.com
Re: FMLA Recertification - M. Meindl

Let me review your concerns and circle back Max.  Appreciate the opportunity to review. 

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Sent: Tuesday, October 22, 2019 4:47:59 PM 
To: Cooley, Sandra <Sandra.Cooley@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: femamax@gmail.com <femamax@gmail.com> 
Subject: FW: FMLA Recertification - M. Meindl  

Ms. Cooley, 
I am forwarding this email to you for information purposes. 
I have no problem doing the FMLA recertification, subject to the time issues and making appointments. 
What concerns me is that I feel as if I have been singled out for special attention. 
The who of that issue is subject to a bit of detective work but I know who has questioned me in the past. 
If I wasn’t doing my job, that would be one thing but I am doing it and I do it well. 
If you have any insight or words of encouragement.. send them on. 

Be well. 

___________________________________ 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.   
It may contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).   
The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to 
be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, October 22, 2019 4:22 PM 
To: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov>; David, Patricia <Patricia.David@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Wick, Timothy <Timothy.Wick@fema.dhs.gov>; TERRY, DETRA S. <DETRA.TERRY@FEMA.DHS.GOV>; Alexander, 
Dennis <dennis.alexander@fema.dhs.gov>; brent@guerradays.com; FEMA-EqualRights <FEMA-

8

 
  
  
  
   
  
EqualRights@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: FMLA Recertification - M. Meindl 

JG, 
My next appointment with the VA is 10/29/2019 with the ENT (ear, nose, throat) group at the DeBakey VA hospital to 
attempt to ascertain the source for my recurring dizzy spells. 
My next appointment with my primary care physician is next Feb, 2020. 
My next appointment with my pulmonary care specialist for my COPD (Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease) is also 
next year. 
I will do an online request to see my primary at the Katy VA outpatient clinic, but I’m not sure if that can happen within 15 
days, it is the VA, so nothing is for certain. 
I will also attempt to get an appointment with my primary care private physician in Bellville. 
I must admit that as an senior citizen and as an individual who has identified, in the onboarding process, as an individual 
with a disability and when factoring in the very problematic heart surgery and subsequent associated health issues, I am 
concerned about the way the institution and/or individuals within the institution, treat those identified as disabled, more 
specifically, myself.   
If my work was lacking, maybe I could understand, but it isn’t and I don’t understand.   
It does seem that personalities have drifted in to the equation, in my opinion. 
I appreciate your assistance and efforts with my disability and during my recovery but, I must admit that it has been an 
extremely distasteful experience with other FEMA personnel. 

I will endeavor to get the paperwork returned in a timely manner but I am concerned about the 15 day window. 

Please advise. 

___________________________________ 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.   
It may contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).   
The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to 
be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov>  
Sent: Tuesday, October 22, 2019 3:13 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Wick, Timothy <Timothy.Wick@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FMLA Recertification - M. Meindl 

Good afternoon Max,  
On May 1, 2019 you were initially approved for FMLA due to a serious/chronic health condition.  Given that it has now 
been more than thirty (30) calendar days since your last medical update for your current FMLA condition, I am requesting 
that you provide me with an FMLA recertification as it relates to your current FMLA condition of record.  The 

9

  
  
  
  
   
  
  
recertification is now necessary to ensure that the workload on your team can be planned and managed effectively while 
assisting you during your time of recovery.  Therefore, I am requesting that you work with your physician to respond to 
all questions where appropriate especially those related to the questions identified below. These questions are not separate 
and apart from the recertification form but can be responded to within the context of the questions already provided on the 
form.  (29 CFR 825.308(a), permits recertification every 30 days for chronic or permanent/long-term conditions.)   
Purpose of this FMLA Recertification Update: 
  1. To validate if you are continuing to see the physician for the specific condition listed on your FMLA application dated 
and signed by your physician, on 4/11/2019.       
  2.  Request that you provide an estimate of the duration of your condition & if you will be incapacitated for a single 
continuous period of time.  (See questions #1 & #4). 
  3.  Request that you specify what dates, if any, you will have planned appointments within the next 30 days. (See 
Question #5) 
  4.  Request that your physician state whether or not you require care on an intermittent or reduced schedule basis, 
including any time for recovery.  (See Question #6) 
  5.  Request that your physician provide an estimate of when you will have flare-ups during your recovery period (if 
known) that will prevent you from performing your job functions. (See question #7). 
Your health remains of paramount concern to me as well as our mission.  My goal remains to work cooperatively with 
you and your physician in a manner which affords you the best opportunity to recover and return to full time employment 
status.  However, failure to provide this requested FMLA Recertification information within fifteen (15) working days of 
receipt will result in the denial of any FMLA related leave until the information is provided.  
If you experience difficulty providing this information within the specified period, please see me, or in my absence 
Patricia David, and provide a brief written statement documenting your hardship and your request for extension will be 
responded to within three (3) working days. 
Regards, 

Jacqueline Gause, MSc 
Human Resources 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Department of Homeland Security 
Hurricane Harvey-DR4332-TX 
Texas Recovery Office  
Houston, TX 
Mobile: 202-322-6241 

10

  
  
  
  
  
  
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, October 22, 2019 4:48 PM
Cooley, Sandra
femamax@gmail.com
FW: FMLA Recertification - M. Meindl

Ms. Cooley, 
I am forwarding this email to you for information purposes. 
I have no problem doing the FMLA recertification, subject to the time issues and making appointments. 
What concerns me is that I feel as if I have been singled out for special attention. 
The who of that issue is subject to a bit of detective work but I know who has questioned me in the past. 
If I wasn’t doing my job, that would be one thing but I am doing it and I do it well. 
If you have any insight or words of encouragement.. send them on. 

Be well. 

___________________________________ 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.   
It may contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).   
The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to 
be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, October 22, 2019 4:22 PM 
To: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov>; David, Patricia <Patricia.David@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Wick, Timothy <Timothy.Wick@fema.dhs.gov>; TERRY, DETRA S. <DETRA.TERRY@FEMA.DHS.GOV>; Alexander, 
Dennis <dennis.alexander@fema.dhs.gov>; brent@guerradays.com; FEMA-EqualRights <FEMA-
EqualRights@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: FMLA Recertification - M. Meindl 

JG, 
My next appointment with the VA is 10/29/2019 with the ENT (ear, nose, throat) group at the DeBakey VA hospital to 
attempt to ascertain the source for my recurring dizzy spells. 
My next appointment with my primary care physician is next Feb, 2020. 
My next appointment with my pulmonary care specialist for my COPD (Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease) is also 
next year. 

11

 
 
   
 
 
I will do an online request to see my primary at the Katy VA outpatient clinic, but I’m not sure if that can happen within 15 
days, it is the VA, so nothing is for certain. 
I will also attempt to get an appointment with my primary care private physician in Bellville. 
I must admit that as an senior citizen and as an individual who has identified, in the onboarding process, as an individual 
with a disability and when factoring in the very problematic heart surgery and subsequent associated health issues, I am 
concerned about the way the institution and/or individuals within the institution, treat those identified as disabled, more 
specifically, myself.   
If my work was lacking, maybe I could understand, but it isn’t and I don’t understand.   
It does seem that personalities have drifted in to the equation, in my opinion. 
I appreciate your assistance and efforts with my disability and during my recovery but, I must admit that it has been an 
extremely distasteful experience with other FEMA personnel. 

I will endeavor to get the paperwork returned in a timely manner but I am concerned about the 15 day window. 

Please advise. 

___________________________________ 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.   
It may contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).   
The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to 
be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov>  
Sent: Tuesday, October 22, 2019 3:13 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Wick, Timothy <Timothy.Wick@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FMLA Recertification - M. Meindl 

Good afternoon Max,  

On May 1, 2019 you were initially approved for FMLA due to a serious/chronic health condition.  Given that it has now 
been more than thirty (30) calendar days since your last medical update for your current FMLA condition, I am requesting 
that you provide me with an FMLA recertification as it relates to your current FMLA condition of record.  The 
recertification is now necessary to ensure that the workload on your team can be planned and managed effectively while 
assisting you during your time of recovery.  Therefore, I am requesting that you work with your physician to respond to 
all questions where appropriate especially those related to the questions identified below. These questions are not separate 
and apart from the recertification form but can be responded to within the context of the questions already provided on the 
form.  (29 CFR 825.308(a), permits recertification every 30 days for chronic or permanent/long-term conditions.)   

Purpose of this FMLA Recertification Update: 

12

 
 
 
   
 
 
  1. To validate if you are continuing to see the physician for the specific condition listed on your FMLA application dated 
and signed by your physician, on 4/11/2019.       

  2.  Request that you provide an estimate of the duration of your condition & if you will be incapacitated for a single 
continuous period of time.  (See questions #1 & #4). 

  3.  Request that you specify what dates, if any, you will have planned appointments within the next 30 days. (See 
Question #5) 

  4.  Request that your physician state whether or not you require care on an intermittent or reduced schedule basis, 
including any time for recovery.  (See Question #6) 

  5.  Request that your physician provide an estimate of when you will have flare-ups during your recovery period (if 
known) that will prevent you from performing your job functions. (See question #7). 

Your health remains of paramount concern to me as well as our mission.  My goal remains to work cooperatively with 
you and your physician in a manner which affords you the best opportunity to recover and return to full time employment 
status.  However, failure to provide this requested FMLA Recertification information within fifteen (15) working days of 
receipt will result in the denial of any FMLA related leave until the information is provided.  

If you experience difficulty providing this information within the specified period, please see me, or in my absence 
Patricia David, and provide a brief written statement documenting your hardship and your request for extension will be 
responded to within three (3) working days. 

Regards, 

Jacqueline Gause, MSc 
Human Resources 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Department of Homeland Security 
Hurricane Harvey-DR4332-TX 
Texas Recovery Office  
Houston, TX 
Mobile: 202-322-6241 

13

 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:

Subject:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, October 22, 2019 4:22 PM
Gause, Jacqueline; David, Patricia
Wick, Timothy; TERRY, DETRA S.; Alexander, Dennis; brent@guerradays.com; FEMA-
EqualRights
RE: FMLA Recertification - M. Meindl

JG, 
My next appointment with the VA is 10/29/2019 with the ENT (ear, nose, throat) group at the DeBakey VA hospital to 
attempt to ascertain the source for my recurring dizzy spells. 
My next appointment with my primary care physician is next Feb, 2020. 
My next appointment with my pulmonary care specialist for my COPD (Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease) is also 
next year. 
I will do an online request to see my primary at the Katy VA outpatient clinic, but I’m not sure if that can happen within 15 
days, it is the VA, so nothing is for certain. 
I will also attempt to get an appointment with my primary care private physician in Bellville. 
I must admit that as an senior citizen and as an individual who has identified, in the onboarding process, as an individual 
with a disability and when factoring in the very problematic heart surgery and subsequent associated health issues, I am 
concerned about the way the institution and/or individuals within the institution, treat those identified as disabled, more 
specifically, myself.   
If my work was lacking, maybe I could understand, but it isn’t and I don’t understand.   
It does seem that personalities have drifted in to the equation, in my opinion. 
I appreciate your assistance and efforts with my disability and during my recovery but, I must admit that it has been an 
extremely distasteful experience with other FEMA personnel. 

I will endeavor to get the paperwork returned in a timely manner but I am concerned about the 15 day window. 

Please advise. 

___________________________________ 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.   
It may contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).   
The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to 
be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov>  
Sent: Tuesday, October 22, 2019 3:13 PM 

14

 
 
 
   
 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Wick, Timothy <Timothy.Wick@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FMLA Recertification - M. Meindl 

Good afternoon Max,  

On May 1, 2019 you were initially approved for FMLA due to a serious/chronic health condition.  Given that it has now 
been more than thirty (30) calendar days since your last medical update for your current FMLA condition, I am requesting 
that you provide me with an FMLA recertification as it relates to your current FMLA condition of record.  The 
recertification is now necessary to ensure that the workload on your team can be planned and managed effectively while 
assisting you during your time of recovery.  Therefore, I am requesting that you work with your physician to respond to 
all questions where appropriate especially those related to the questions identified below. These questions are not separate 
and apart from the recertification form but can be responded to within the context of the questions already provided on the 
form.  (29 CFR 825.308(a), permits recertification every 30 days for chronic or permanent/long-term conditions.)   

Purpose of this FMLA Recertification Update: 

  1. To validate if you are continuing to see the physician for the specific condition listed on your FMLA application dated 
and signed by your physician, on 4/11/2019.       

  2.  Request that you provide an estimate of the duration of your condition & if you will be incapacitated for a single 
continuous period of time.  (See questions #1 & #4). 

  3.  Request that you specify what dates, if any, you will have planned appointments within the next 30 days. (See 
Question #5) 

  4.  Request that your physician state whether or not you require care on an intermittent or reduced schedule basis, 
including any time for recovery.  (See Question #6) 

  5.  Request that your physician provide an estimate of when you will have flare-ups during your recovery period (if 
known) that will prevent you from performing your job functions. (See question #7). 

Your health remains of paramount concern to me as well as our mission.  My goal remains to work cooperatively with 
you and your physician in a manner which affords you the best opportunity to recover and return to full time employment 
status.  However, failure to provide this requested FMLA Recertification information within fifteen (15) working days of 
receipt will result in the denial of any FMLA related leave until the information is provided.  

If you experience difficulty providing this information within the specified period, please see me, or in my absence 
Patricia David, and provide a brief written statement documenting your hardship and your request for extension will be 
responded to within three (3) working days. 

Regards, 

Jacqueline Gause, MSc 
Human Resources 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Department of Homeland Security 
Hurricane Harvey-DR4332-TX 
Texas Recovery Office  
Houston, TX 
Mobile: 202-322-6241 

15

 
 
16

 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, October 22, 2019 4:23 PM
femamax@gmail.com
FW: FMLA Recertification - M. Meindl

___________________________________ 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.   
It may contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).   
The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to 
be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, October 22, 2019 4:22 PM 
To: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov>; David, Patricia <Patricia.David@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Wick, Timothy <Timothy.Wick@fema.dhs.gov>; TERRY, DETRA S. <DETRA.TERRY@FEMA.DHS.GOV>; Alexander, 
Dennis <dennis.alexander@fema.dhs.gov>; brent@guerradays.com; FEMA-EqualRights <FEMA-
EqualRights@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: FMLA Recertification - M. Meindl 

JG, 
My next appointment with the VA is 10/29/2019 with the ENT (ear, nose, throat) group at the DeBakey VA hospital to 
attempt to ascertain the source for my recurring dizzy spells. 
My next appointment with my primary care physician is next Feb, 2020. 
My next appointment with my pulmonary care specialist for my COPD (Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease) is also 
next year. 
I will do an online request to see my primary at the Katy VA outpatient clinic, but I’m not sure if that can happen within 15 
days, it is the VA, so nothing is for certain. 
I will also attempt to get an appointment with my primary care private physician in Bellville. 
I must admit that as an senior citizen and as an individual who has identified, in the onboarding process, as an individual 
with a disability and when factoring in the very problematic heart surgery and subsequent associated health issues, I am 
concerned about the way the institution and/or individuals within the institution, treat those identified as disabled, more 
specifically, myself.   
If my work was lacking, maybe I could understand, but it isn’t and I don’t understand.   
It does seem that personalities have drifted in to the equation, in my opinion. 

17

 
 
   
 
 
I appreciate your assistance and efforts with my disability and during my recovery but, I must admit that it has been an 
extremely distasteful experience with other FEMA personnel. 

I will endeavor to get the paperwork returned in a timely manner but I am concerned about the 15 day window. 

Please advise. 

___________________________________ 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.   
It may contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).   
The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to 
be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov>  
Sent: Tuesday, October 22, 2019 3:13 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Wick, Timothy <Timothy.Wick@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FMLA Recertification - M. Meindl 

Good afternoon Max,  

On May 1, 2019 you were initially approved for FMLA due to a serious/chronic health condition.  Given that it has now 
been more than thirty (30) calendar days since your last medical update for your current FMLA condition, I am requesting 
that you provide me with an FMLA recertification as it relates to your current FMLA condition of record.  The 
recertification is now necessary to ensure that the workload on your team can be planned and managed effectively while 
assisting you during your time of recovery.  Therefore, I am requesting that you work with your physician to respond to 
all questions where appropriate especially those related to the questions identified below. These questions are not separate 
and apart from the recertification form but can be responded to within the context of the questions already provided on the 
form.  (29 CFR 825.308(a), permits recertification every 30 days for chronic or permanent/long-term conditions.)   

Purpose of this FMLA Recertification Update: 

  1. To validate if you are continuing to see the physician for the specific condition listed on your FMLA application dated 
and signed by your physician, on 4/11/2019.       

  2.  Request that you provide an estimate of the duration of your condition & if you will be incapacitated for a single 
continuous period of time.  (See questions #1 & #4). 

  3.  Request that you specify what dates, if any, you will have planned appointments within the next 30 days. (See 
Question #5) 

18

 
 
 
   
 
 
  4.  Request that your physician state whether or not you require care on an intermittent or reduced schedule basis, 
including any time for recovery.  (See Question #6) 

  5.  Request that your physician provide an estimate of when you will have flare-ups during your recovery period (if 
known) that will prevent you from performing your job functions. (See question #7). 

Your health remains of paramount concern to me as well as our mission.  My goal remains to work cooperatively with 
you and your physician in a manner which affords you the best opportunity to recover and return to full time employment 
status.  However, failure to provide this requested FMLA Recertification information within fifteen (15) working days of 
receipt will result in the denial of any FMLA related leave until the information is provided.  

If you experience difficulty providing this information within the specified period, please see me, or in my absence 
Patricia David, and provide a brief written statement documenting your hardship and your request for extension will be 
responded to within three (3) working days. 

Regards, 

Jacqueline Gause, MSc 
Human Resources 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Department of Homeland Security 
Hurricane Harvey-DR4332-TX 
Texas Recovery Office  
Houston, TX 
Mobile: 202-322-6241 

19

 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:
Attachments:

Good afternoon Max,  

Gause, Jacqueline
Tuesday, October 22, 2019 3:13 PM
Meindl, Max
Wick, Timothy
FMLA Recertification - M. Meindl
FMLA - Health provider form.pdf

On May 1, 2019 you were initially approved for FMLA due to a serious/chronic health condition.  Given that it has now 
been more than thirty (30) calendar days since your last medical update for your current FMLA condition, I am requesting 
that you provide me with an FMLA recertification as it relates to your current FMLA condition of record.  The 
recertification is now necessary to ensure that the workload on your team can be planned and managed effectively while 
assisting you during your time of recovery.  Therefore, I am requesting that you work with your physician to respond to 
all questions where appropriate especially those related to the questions identified below. These questions are not separate 
and apart from the recertification form but can be responded to within the context of the questions already provided on the 
form.  (29 CFR 825.308(a), permits recertification every 30 days for chronic or permanent/long-term conditions.)   

Purpose of this FMLA Recertification Update: 

  1. To validate if you are continuing to see the physician for the specific condition listed on your FMLA application dated 
and signed by your physician, on 4/11/2019.       

  2.  Request that you provide an estimate of the duration of your condition & if you will be incapacitated for a single 
continuous period of time.  (See questions #1 & #4). 

  3.  Request that you specify what dates, if any, you will have planned appointments within the next 30 days. (See 
Question #5) 

  4.  Request that your physician state whether or not you require care on an intermittent or reduced schedule basis, 
including any time for recovery.  (See Question #6) 

  5.  Request that your physician provide an estimate of when you will have flare-ups during your recovery period (if 
known) that will prevent you from performing your job functions. (See question #7). 

Your health remains of paramount concern to me as well as our mission.  My goal remains to work cooperatively with 
you and your physician in a manner which affords you the best opportunity to recover and return to full time employment 
status.  However, failure to provide this requested FMLA Recertification information within fifteen (15) working days of 
receipt will result in the denial of any FMLA related leave until the information is provided.  

If you experience difficulty providing this information within the specified period, please see me, or in my absence 
Patricia David, and provide a brief written statement documenting your hardship and your request for extension will be 
responded to within three (3) working days. 

Regards, 

Jacqueline Gause, MSc 
Human Resources 

20

 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Department of Homeland Security 
Hurricane Harvey-DR4332-TX 
Texas Recovery Office  
Houston, TX 
Mobile: 202-322-6241 

21

 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Thank you. 

Vardy, Loretta
Tuesday, November 13, 2018 2:51 PM
Meindl, Max
RE: HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, November 13, 2018 3:15 PM 
To: Vardy, Loretta <Loretta.Vardy@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Vardy, Loretta  
Sent: Tuesday, November 13, 2018 2:11 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint 

Thank you Mr. Meindl.  I work with Karen who is currently on leave.  I have forwarded your message to OER.  I have 
been told to ask you to fill out the attached form and return it to me so that they can close the case out. 
Thank you, 
Loretta 

Loretta Vardy 
Branch Chief for Mediation and Training 
ADR Division/OCC/FEMA 
500 C Street SW  
4NE 2407 
Washington D.C. 20472-3400 

22

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Office: 202-212-1563 
Cell: 202-286-8804 
This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic 
communications and may contain confidential and legally privileged information.  If the reader of this message is not the 
intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this message is strictly 
prohibited.  If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message.  Thank 
you. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, November 13, 2018 11:55 AM 
To: Asaro, Karen <Karen.Asaro@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Walters, Albert <Albert.Walters@fema.dhs.gov>; Vardy, Loretta <Loretta.Vardy@fema.dhs.gov>; Meindl, Max 
<max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint 

Ms. Asaro, 
Pursuant to the above referenced case number and complaint, I am formally requesting the withdrawal of my filing. 
I am satisfied with the results of my conversations with my supervisors and feel confident that the best interest of all 
parties would be best served with the withdrawal of my complaint. 
Overall, it was an educational and enlightening experience and I would like to thank all parties who were involved in an 
pursuing and obtaining an acceptable resolution. 

Thank you. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Asaro, Karen  
Sent: Wednesday, November 7, 2018 4:10 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Automatic reply: RA Request 

Hello, 

I will be out of the office until November 23, 2018 and I will not have access to email during this time. I will respond 
promptly upon my return. 

23

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
If you need to speak with someone during my absence please call Loretta Vardy at 202 286-8804. 

Thank You, 
Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 
Washington, DC 20472 
mobile: 571 431-2863 

This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic communications and may contain confidential 
and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, 
use or copying of this message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this message in error please reply immediately to the sender and delete this 
message. Thank you. 

24

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, November 13, 2018 2:15 PM
Vardy, Loretta
RE: HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint
FEMA EEO Withdrawal Form- Letterhead-signed.pdf

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Vardy, Loretta  
Sent: Tuesday, November 13, 2018 2:11 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint 

Thank you Mr. Meindl.  I work with Karen who is currently on leave.  I have forwarded your message to OER.  I have 
been told to ask you to fill out the attached form and return it to me so that they can close the case out. 
Thank you, 
Loretta 

Loretta Vardy 
Branch Chief for Mediation and Training 
ADR Division/OCC/FEMA 
500 C Street SW  
4NE 2407 
Washington D.C. 20472-3400 

Office: 202-212-1563 
Cell: 202-286-8804 
This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic 
communications and may contain confidential and legally privileged information.  If the reader of this message is not the 
intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this message is strictly 

25

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
prohibited.  If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message.  Thank 
you. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, November 13, 2018 11:55 AM 
To: Asaro, Karen <Karen.Asaro@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Walters, Albert <Albert.Walters@fema.dhs.gov>; Vardy, Loretta <Loretta.Vardy@fema.dhs.gov>; Meindl, Max 
<max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint 

Ms. Asaro, 
Pursuant to the above referenced case number and complaint, I am formally requesting the withdrawal of my filing. 
I am satisfied with the results of my conversations with my supervisors and feel confident that the best interest of all 
parties would be best served with the withdrawal of my complaint. 
Overall, it was an educational and enlightening experience and I would like to thank all parties who were involved in an 
pursuing and obtaining an acceptable resolution. 

Thank you. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Asaro, Karen  
Sent: Wednesday, November 7, 2018 4:10 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Automatic reply: RA Request 

Hello, 

I will be out of the office until November 23, 2018 and I will not have access to email during this time. I will respond 
promptly upon my return. 

If you need to speak with someone during my absence please call Loretta Vardy at 202 286-8804. 

Thank You, 
Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 

26

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 
Washington, DC 20472 
mobile: 571 431-2863 

This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic communications and may contain confidential 
and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, 
use or copying of this message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this message in error please reply immediately to the sender and delete this 
message. Thank you. 

27

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Vardy, Loretta
Tuesday, November 13, 2018 2:11 PM
Meindl, Max
RE: HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint
FEMA EEO Withdrawal Form- Letterhead.doc

Thank you Mr. Meindl.  I work with Karen who is currently on leave.  I have forwarded your message to OER.  I have 
been told to ask you to fill out the attached form and return it to me so that they can close the case out. 
Thank you, 
Loretta 

Loretta Vardy 
Branch Chief for Mediation and Training 
ADR Division/OCC/FEMA 
500 C Street SW  
4NE 2407 
Washington D.C. 20472-3400 

Office: 202-212-1563 
Cell: 202-286-8804 
This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic 
communications and may contain confidential and legally privileged information.  If the reader of this message is not the 
intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this message is strictly 
prohibited.  If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message.  Thank 
you. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, November 13, 2018 11:55 AM 
To: Asaro, Karen <Karen.Asaro@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Walters, Albert <Albert.Walters@fema.dhs.gov>; Vardy, Loretta <Loretta.Vardy@fema.dhs.gov>; Meindl, Max 
<max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint 

Ms. Asaro, 
Pursuant to the above referenced case number and complaint, I am formally requesting the withdrawal of my filing. 
I am satisfied with the results of my conversations with my supervisors and feel confident that the best interest of all 
parties would be best served with the withdrawal of my complaint. 
Overall, it was an educational and enlightening experience and I would like to thank all parties who were involved in an 
pursuing and obtaining an acceptable resolution. 

Thank you. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 

28

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Asaro, Karen  
Sent: Wednesday, November 7, 2018 4:10 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Automatic reply: RA Request 

Hello, 

I will be out of the office until November 23, 2018 and I will not have access to email during this time. I will respond 
promptly upon my return. 

If you need to speak with someone during my absence please call Loretta Vardy at 202 286-8804. 

Thank You, 
Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 
Washington, DC 20472 
mobile: 571 431-2863 

This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic communications and may contain confidential 
and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, 
use or copying of this message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this message in error please reply immediately to the sender and delete this 
message. Thank you. 

29

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, November 13, 2018 11:19 AM
femamax@gmail.com
FW: Fed HR Review

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: McAllister, Jamie  
Sent: Friday, November 9, 2018 10:17 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Fed HR Review 

Yes, you can either attach a Word doc with your comments to your file, or you can put them in the comment box which 
looks as follows just below where you sign electronically:  

30

 
 
 
 
 
 
From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Friday, November 9, 2018 9:59 AM 
To: McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Fed HR Review 

To clarify, 
Yesterday you advised me that I could comment/upload in my evaluation pursuant to the points you initially proffered as 
concerns in my review, is that correct? 
It was nice making your acquaintance also, and here’s wishing you the best in your endeavors. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

31

 
 
 
  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: McAllister, Jamie  
Sent: Friday, November 9, 2018 9:51 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Fed HR Review 

Good Morning Max, 

Very glad to meet you yesterday. The performance comments provided by Detra have been uploaded into FedHR under 
your case #248282 and I have also attached them. I believe that I have resolved the issue of the reviews being locked. 
HR sometimes locks the forms while they are working on them, and it’s not uncommon to have this issue. Please go 
ahead and sign Quarter 2 and Quarter 3.  

Quarter 2 documents in FEDHR were your Individual Development Plan that you had previously signed and a PDF of the 
performance goals.  

Regards,  

Jamie McAllister 
Deputy Infrastructure Branch Director  
DR 4332 TX JFO Austin 
Region 6 Infrastructure Branch 
DHS/FEMA 
(202) 709-0851 Cell 
jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov 

32

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, November 13, 2018 10:55 AM
Asaro, Karen
Walters, Albert; Vardy, Loretta; Meindl, Max
RE: HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint

Ms. Asaro, 
Pursuant to the above referenced case number and complaint, I am formally requesting the withdrawal of my filing. 
I am satisfied with the results of my conversations with my supervisors and feel confident that the best interest of all 
parties would be best served with the withdrawal of my complaint. 
Overall, it was an educational and enlightening experience and I would like to thank all parties who were involved in an 
pursuing and obtaining an acceptable resolution. 

Thank you. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Asaro, Karen  
Sent: Wednesday, November 7, 2018 4:10 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Automatic reply: RA Request 

Hello, 

I will be out of the office until November 23, 2018 and I will not have access to email during this time. I will respond 
promptly upon my return. 

If you need to speak with someone during my absence please call Loretta Vardy at 202 286-8804. 

Thank You, 
Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 

33

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Washington, DC 20472 
mobile: 571 431-2863 

This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic communications and may contain confidential 
and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, 
use or copying of this message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this message in error please reply immediately to the sender and delete this 
message. Thank you. 

34

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Max, 

Walters, Albert
Tuesday, November 13, 2018 10:18 AM
Meindl, Max
RE: Mediation with Karen Asari

I am willing and we owe Karen an answer. I know she needs to report the progress on the mediation and I informed her 
that we were meeting last week. If we need to copy the lady she identified for immediate assistance we need to copy 
her on any communications with Karen. I am available today to discuss. You can call me on my cell. 

Thanks, 

Albert P. Walters III 
Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
Disaster 4332 – Harvey 
Cell Phone 504-570-4412 
Albert.Walters@FEMA.DHS.GOV 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, November 13, 2018 8:46 AM 
To: Walters, Albert <Albert.Walters@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Mediation with Karen Asari 

You and I can wrap it up Albert, if you’re willing. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

35

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From: Walters, Albert  
Sent: Friday, November 9, 2018 4:15 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Mediation with Karen Asari 

Max, 

We owe Karen an e mail or a call to discuss the mediation and your plans going forward. Do you want to have a 
discussion or do you want to set up a conference call with Karen. Let me know, I am in class next week but available on 
Tuesday for a call.. 

Albert P. Walters III 
Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
Disaster 4332 – Harvey 
Cell Phone 504-570-4412 
Albert.Walters@FEMA.DHS.GOV 

36

 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, November 13, 2018 8:50 AM
Walters, Albert
RE: Mediation with Karen Asari

Albert, 
By the way, I appreciate your professional and kind assistance, it was a welcome change and experience. 
Thank you. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Walters, Albert  
Sent: Friday, November 9, 2018 4:15 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Mediation with Karen Asari 

Max, 

We owe Karen an e mail or a call to discuss the mediation and your plans going forward. Do you want to have a 
discussion or do you want to set up a conference call with Karen. Let me know, I am in class next week but available on 
Tuesday for a call.. 

Albert P. Walters III 
Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
Disaster 4332 – Harvey 
Cell Phone 504-570-4412 
Albert.Walters@FEMA.DHS.GOV 

37

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, November 13, 2018 8:49 AM
Walters, Albert
RE: Mediation with Karen Asari

Albert, 
I received the following from Karen last week: 

Hello, 

I will be out of the office until November 23, 2018 and I will not have access to email during this time. I will respond 
promptly upon my return. 

If you need to speak with someone during my absence please call Loretta Vardy at 202 286-8804. 

Thank You, 
Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 
Washington, DC 20472 
mobile: 571 431-2863 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Walters, Albert  
Sent: Friday, November 9, 2018 4:15 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Mediation with Karen Asari 

Max, 

38

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We owe Karen an e mail or a call to discuss the mediation and your plans going forward. Do you want to have a 
discussion or do you want to set up a conference call with Karen. Let me know, I am in class next week but available on 
Tuesday for a call.. 

Albert P. Walters III 
Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
Disaster 4332 – Harvey 
Cell Phone 504-570-4412 
Albert.Walters@FEMA.DHS.GOV 

39

 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, November 13, 2018 8:46 AM
Walters, Albert
RE: Mediation with Karen Asari

You and I can wrap it up Albert, if you’re willing. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Walters, Albert  
Sent: Friday, November 9, 2018 4:15 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Mediation with Karen Asari 

Max, 

We owe Karen an e mail or a call to discuss the mediation and your plans going forward. Do you want to have a 
discussion or do you want to set up a conference call with Karen. Let me know, I am in class next week but available on 
Tuesday for a call.. 

Albert P. Walters III 
Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
Disaster 4332 – Harvey 
Cell Phone 504-570-4412 
Albert.Walters@FEMA.DHS.GOV 

40

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Max, 

Walters, Albert
Friday, November 9, 2018 4:15 PM
Meindl, Max
Mediation with Karen Asari

We owe Karen an e mail or a call to discuss the mediation and your plans going forward. Do you want to have a 
discussion or do you want to set up a conference call with Karen. Let me know, I am in class next week but available on 
Tuesday for a call.. 

Albert P. Walters III 
Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
Disaster 4332 – Harvey 
Cell Phone 504-570-4412 
Albert.Walters@FEMA.DHS.GOV 

41

 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

McAllister, Jamie
Friday, November 9, 2018 10:17 AM
Meindl, Max
Terry, Detra
RE: Fed HR Review

Yes, you can either attach a Word doc with your comments to your file, or you can put them in the comment box which 
looks as follows just below where you sign electronically:  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Friday, November 9, 2018 9:59 AM 
To: McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Fed HR Review 

To clarify, 
Yesterday you advised me that I could comment/upload in my evaluation pursuant to the points you initially proffered as 
concerns in my review, is that correct? 
It was nice making your acquaintance also, and here’s wishing you the best in your endeavors. 

42

 
 
 
 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: McAllister, Jamie  
Sent: Friday, November 9, 2018 9:51 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Fed HR Review 

Good Morning Max, 

Very glad to meet you yesterday. The performance comments provided by Detra have been uploaded into FedHR under 
your case #248282 and I have also attached them. I believe that I have resolved the issue of the reviews being locked. 
HR sometimes locks the forms while they are working on them, and it’s not uncommon to have this issue. Please go 
ahead and sign Quarter 2 and Quarter 3.  

Quarter 2 documents in FEDHR were your Individual Development Plan that you had previously signed and a PDF of the 
performance goals.  

Regards,  

Jamie McAllister 
Deputy Infrastructure Branch Director  
DR 4332 TX JFO Austin 
Region 6 Infrastructure Branch 
DHS/FEMA 
(202) 709-0851 Cell 
jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov 

43

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Greetings, 

Chatman, Edward
Friday, November 2, 2018 9:31 AM
FEMA-4332-DR-TX-All-Hands
Security Procedures for Visitors & Guests 
FEMA Directive 121-3 Revision 1.pdf

The Security Staff and Management is requesting that we all comply with the FEMA Security 
Directive 121-3, Revision 1 regarding visitors and access to FEMA facilities. 
If you are expecting visitor(s), you must provide the following information to the Security 
Manager in advance: 

-  Visitor(s) Name 
-  Affiliated Agency 
-  Point of Contact at the TRO (or Branches) 
-  Name and phone number of the person who will escort them (if different from the POC) 

Attached please find the related guidelines. If you have any questions, please contact Point of 
Contact  

Thank you! 

Regards, 

Edward Chatman 
Security Manager 
DR-4332-TX TRO 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) 
Cell: 202-803-3548 
edward.chatman@fema.dhs.gov 

44

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, October 30, 2018 11:46 AM
femamax@gmail.com
FW: OER AHU-18-164 Closure Letter
PAGS Sit With Guidance-10-26-18.pdf

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, October 30, 2018 11:45 AM 
To: Lancaster, Dacia <Dacia.Lancaster@fema.dhs.gov>; FEMA.Harassment <fema.harassment@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-AID-Administrative Investigations Directive Committee <FEMA-AID-
AdministrativeInvestigationsDirectiveCommittee@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: OER AHU-18-164 Closure Letter 

Another issue to keep in mind is that the meetings I am having concerns about were called “Sit-With”, see below.  Policy 
was violated in even calling these meetings sit-withs, in my opinion. 

-----Original Appointment-----  
From: Harrison, Jade Sent: Tuesday, August 14, 2018 6:38 PM  
To: Meindl, Max; Terry, Detra; Slie, Brian Subject: M. Meindl Sit-with  
When: Wednesday, August 15, 2018 2:00 PM-2:30 PM (UTC-06:00) Central Time (US & Canada).  
Where: Houston office- Rm 225, conference call number provided 

From the Sit With Guidance document: 
PAGS Sit-With Guidance 
What is a sit-with? 
A sit-with is a one-on-one feedback coaching session between a manager and staff.  Staff will  
participate in an initial sit-with with their manager, during which they will discuss their previous disaster roles, particular 
technical specialties and skill sets. This discussion will inform leadership on the level of complexity for a staff’s assignment. 

45

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Please note that a sit-with is a one-on-one meeting and all of these alleged “sit-withs” were group hugs without the 
benefit of the hug, more like a ganging up on the new guy. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Lancaster, Dacia  
Sent: Friday, October 19, 2018 5:38 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-AID-Administrative Investigations Directive Committee <FEMA-AID-
AdministrativeInvestigationsDirectiveCommittee@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: OER AHU-18-164 Closure Letter 

Good afternoon, 

Please see the attached response from the Office of Equal Rights, Director. 

V/r, 

Dacia Lancaster 
Anti-Harassment Unit 
Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/FEMA 

46

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, October 30, 2018 11:45 AM
Lancaster, Dacia; FEMA.Harassment
FEMA-AID-Administrative Investigations Directive Committee
RE: OER AHU-18-164 Closure Letter
PAGS Sit With Guidance-10-26-18.pdf

Another issue to keep in mind is that the meetings I am having concerns about were called “Sit-With”, see below.  Policy 
was violated in even calling these meetings sit-withs, in my opinion. 

-----Original Appointment-----  
From: Harrison, Jade Sent: Tuesday, August 14, 2018 6:38 PM  
To: Meindl, Max; Terry, Detra; Slie, Brian Subject: M. Meindl Sit-with  
When: Wednesday, August 15, 2018 2:00 PM-2:30 PM (UTC-06:00) Central Time (US & Canada).  
Where: Houston office- Rm 225, conference call number provided 

From the Sit With Guidance document: 
PAGS Sit-With Guidance 
What is a sit-with? 
A sit-with is a one-on-one feedback coaching session between a manager and staff.  Staff will  
participate in an initial sit-with with their manager, during which they will discuss their previous disaster roles, particular 
technical specialties and skill sets. This discussion will inform leadership on the level of complexity for a staff’s assignment. 

Please note that a sit-with is a one-on-one meeting and all of these alleged “sit-withs” were group hugs without the 
benefit of the hug, more like a ganging up on the new guy. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Lancaster, Dacia  
Sent: Friday, October 19, 2018 5:38 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-AID-Administrative Investigations Directive Committee <FEMA-AID-
AdministrativeInvestigationsDirectiveCommittee@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: OER AHU-18-164 Closure Letter 

47

 
 
 
 
 
 
Good afternoon, 

Please see the attached response from the Office of Equal Rights, Director. 

V/r, 

Dacia Lancaster 
Anti-Harassment Unit 
Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/FEMA 

48

 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, October 30, 2018 11:07 AM
femamax@gmail.com
FW: sit with comms
RE: M. Meindl Sit-with; RE: M. Meindl Sit-with; RE: M. Meindl Sit-with; RE: M. Meindl Sit-
with

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, September 12, 2018 1:28 PM 
To: Walters, Albert <Albert.Walters@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: sit with comms 

For your information, the sit with email chain that triggered the harassment filing. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

49

 
 
 
 
 
 
50

  
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, October 30, 2018 11:05 AM
femamax@gmail.com
FW: OER AHU-18-164 Closure Letter
Albert.pdf

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, October 30, 2018 11:03 AM 
To: Lancaster, Dacia <Dacia.Lancaster@fema.dhs.gov>; FEMA.Harassment <fema.harassment@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-OCSO-MISCON <fema-ocso-miscon@fema.dhs.gov>; Grant, Raphael <raphael.grant@fema.dhs.gov>; Hass, 
Andrew <andrew.hass@fema.dhs.gov>; Hayes, Ashton <ashton.hayes@fema.dhs.gov>; Hoburg, Leigh 
<Leigh.Hoburg@fema.dhs.gov>; Jackson, Robyne <Robyne.Jackson@fema.dhs.gov>; Jaeger, Michelle 
<michelle.jaeger@fema.dhs.gov>; Murrock, Kristin <kristin.murrock@fema.dhs.gov>; Pellicci, Kelley 
<Kelley.Pellicci@fema.dhs.gov>; Piper, Dalita <dalita.piper@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: OER AHU-18-164 Closure Letter 

To whom it may concern, 
I find the letter closing this complaint of harassment specious and inaccurate at best. 
The statement that an investigation was conducted and “witness statement” and/or “evidence collected” led to 
allegations being unsubstantiated, is interesting at a minimum. 
Pursuant to the attachment in this email and a copy of a previously sent email, sent to, what I assume to be the primary 
investigator, stipulated in no uncertain terms that there were no witnesses to the alleged harassment and that the 
harassment was my perception of an escalation or a previous meeting wherein I had been inappropriately accused and 
unprofessionally addressed in front of other parties. 
The harassment claim has to do with my perception of the escalation only, no witnesses involved. 

Below is a copy of the email stipulating my concerns when I filed the complaint: 

From: Meindl, Max  

51

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sent: Wednesday, September 12, 2018 1:19 PM 
To: Walters, Albert <Albert.Walters@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: cover email 
I am, after a couple of weeks of considerable handwringing and possible/potential blowback considerations, hereby submitting the 
attached complaint, although I am very concerned about retaliation. 
I have been falsely accused, in my opinion, and it appears the parties involved are escalating the issue to the possible detriment of my 
employment. 
I categorically deny the allegations and assertions as put forth. 
I have had a very successful tenure with FEMA since 09/2017 when deployed to the Beaumont East team. 
I was a high producer of “applicant signed projects” and continue to do the same here as demonstrated in the Grants Manager 
Metrics. 
I never had any problem with “communications” until all of the sudden I can’t seem to do anything correct in my current deployment 
here in Houston. 
I am dismayed with the process and attitude of the parties, the guilty until proven innocent prevailing mindset is inherently unfair. 
A sit-with summary by TK Shadowens before my meeting with the DPAG could best described as “Fiction” because we never discussed 
the items in his summary report and I advised he and DPAG of the same. 
Show me a specific example of the alleged “communication” or “body language” issue.   
I have been falsely accused and convicted without any consideration for my perspective or statements to clarify. 
I am submitting this to you as HR in confidence and would like to request a contact to the EEO group so I can file with them also 
because I feel this issue revolves around my disability and needs to be addressed. 
I would also request a contact to ADR so I can pursue that avenue as well. 
Please contact me with any questions, guidance, advice if required. 
Please advise soonest. 

Thank you in advance. 
Max Meindl 
832-293-3671 

FEMA PDMG 
Houston PA 
202-374-9426 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Lancaster, Dacia  
Sent: Friday, October 19, 2018 5:38 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-AID-Administrative Investigations Directive Committee <FEMA-AID-

52

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AdministrativeInvestigationsDirectiveCommittee@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: OER AHU-18-164 Closure Letter 

Good afternoon, 

Please see the attached response from the Office of Equal Rights, Director. 

V/r, 

Dacia Lancaster 
Anti-Harassment Unit 
Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/FEMA 

53

 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:

Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, October 30, 2018 11:03 AM
Lancaster, Dacia; FEMA.Harassment
FEMA-OCSO-MISCON; Grant, Raphael; Hass, Andrew; Hayes, Ashton; Hoburg, Leigh; 
Jackson, Robyne; Jaeger, Michelle; Murrock, Kristin; Pellicci, Kelley; Piper, Dalita
RE: OER AHU-18-164 Closure Letter
Albert.pdf

To whom it may concern, 
I find the letter closing this complaint of harassment specious and inaccurate at best. 
The statement that an investigation was conducted and “witness statement” and/or “evidence collected” led to 
allegations being unsubstantiated, is interesting at a minimum. 
Pursuant to the attachment in this email and a copy of a previously sent email, sent to, what I assume to be the primary 
investigator, stipulated in no uncertain terms that there were no witnesses to the alleged harassment and that the 
harassment was my perception of an escalation or a previous meeting wherein I had been inappropriately accused and 
unprofessionally addressed in front of other parties. 
The harassment claim has to do with my perception of the escalation only, no witnesses involved. 

Below is a copy of the email stipulating my concerns when I filed the complaint: 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, September 12, 2018 1:19 PM 
To: Walters, Albert <Albert.Walters@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: cover email 
I am, after a couple of weeks of considerable handwringing and possible/potential blowback considerations, hereby submitting the 
attached complaint, although I am very concerned about retaliation. 
I have been falsely accused, in my opinion, and it appears the parties involved are escalating the issue to the possible detriment of my 
employment. 
I categorically deny the allegations and assertions as put forth. 
I have had a very successful tenure with FEMA since 09/2017 when deployed to the Beaumont East team. 
I was a high producer of “applicant signed projects” and continue to do the same here as demonstrated in the Grants Manager 
Metrics. 
I never had any problem with “communications” until all of the sudden I can’t seem to do anything correct in my current deployment 
here in Houston. 
I am dismayed with the process and attitude of the parties, the guilty until proven innocent prevailing mindset is inherently unfair. 
A sit-with summary by TK Shadowens before my meeting with the DPAG could best described as “Fiction” because we never discussed 
the items in his summary report and I advised he and DPAG of the same. 
Show me a specific example of the alleged “communication” or “body language” issue.   
I have been falsely accused and convicted without any consideration for my perspective or statements to clarify. 
I am submitting this to you as HR in confidence and would like to request a contact to the EEO group so I can file with them also 
because I feel this issue revolves around my disability and needs to be addressed. 
I would also request a contact to ADR so I can pursue that avenue as well. 
Please contact me with any questions, guidance, advice if required. 
Please advise soonest. 

Thank you in advance. 
Max Meindl 
832-293-3671 

FEMA PDMG 
Houston PA 

54

 
 
 
 
202-374-9426 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Lancaster, Dacia  
Sent: Friday, October 19, 2018 5:38 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-AID-Administrative Investigations Directive Committee <FEMA-AID-
AdministrativeInvestigationsDirectiveCommittee@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: OER AHU-18-164 Closure Letter 

Good afternoon, 

Please see the attached response from the Office of Equal Rights, Director. 

V/r, 

Dacia Lancaster 
Anti-Harassment Unit 
Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/FEMA 

55

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

McAllister, Jamie
Friday, November 9, 2018 10:17 AM
Meindl, Max
Terry, Detra
RE: Fed HR Review

Yes, you can either attach a Word doc with your comments to your file, or you can put them in the comment box which 
looks as follows just below where you sign electronically:  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Friday, November 9, 2018 9:59 AM 
To: McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Fed HR Review 

To clarify, 
Yesterday you advised me that I could comment/upload in my evaluation pursuant to the points you initially proffered as 
concerns in my review, is that correct? 
It was nice making your acquaintance also, and here’s wishing you the best in your endeavors. 

1

 
 
 
 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: McAllister, Jamie  
Sent: Friday, November 9, 2018 9:51 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Fed HR Review 

Good Morning Max, 

Very glad to meet you yesterday. The performance comments provided by Detra have been uploaded into FedHR under 
your case #248282 and I have also attached them. I believe that I have resolved the issue of the reviews being locked. 
HR sometimes locks the forms while they are working on them, and it’s not uncommon to have this issue. Please go 
ahead and sign Quarter 2 and Quarter 3.  

Quarter 2 documents in FEDHR were your Individual Development Plan that you had previously signed and a PDF of the 
performance goals.  

Regards,  

Jamie McAllister 
Deputy Infrastructure Branch Director  
DR 4332 TX JFO Austin 
Region 6 Infrastructure Branch 
DHS/FEMA 
(202) 709-0851 Cell 
jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov 

2

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Greetings, 

Chatman, Edward
Friday, November 2, 2018 9:31 AM
FEMA-4332-DR-TX-All-Hands
Security Procedures for Visitors & Guests 
FEMA Directive 121-3 Revision 1.pdf

The Security Staff and Management is requesting that we all comply with the FEMA Security 
Directive 121-3, Revision 1 regarding visitors and access to FEMA facilities. 
If you are expecting visitor(s), you must provide the following information to the Security 
Manager in advance: 

-  Visitor(s) Name 
-  Affiliated Agency 
-  Point of Contact at the TRO (or Branches) 
-  Name and phone number of the person who will escort them (if different from the POC) 

Attached please find the related guidelines. If you have any questions, please contact Point of 
Contact  

Thank you! 

Regards, 

Edward Chatman 
Security Manager 
DR-4332-TX TRO 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) 
Cell: 202-803-3548 
edward.chatman@fema.dhs.gov 

3

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, October 30, 2018 11:46 AM
femamax@gmail.com
FW: OER AHU-18-164 Closure Letter
PAGS Sit With Guidance-10-26-18.pdf

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, October 30, 2018 11:45 AM 
To: Lancaster, Dacia <Dacia.Lancaster@fema.dhs.gov>; FEMA.Harassment <fema.harassment@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-AID-Administrative Investigations Directive Committee <FEMA-AID-
AdministrativeInvestigationsDirectiveCommittee@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: OER AHU-18-164 Closure Letter 

Another issue to keep in mind is that the meetings I am having concerns about were called “Sit-With”, see below.  Policy 
was violated in even calling these meetings sit-withs, in my opinion. 

-----Original Appointment-----  
From: Harrison, Jade Sent: Tuesday, August 14, 2018 6:38 PM  
To: Meindl, Max; Terry, Detra; Slie, Brian Subject: M. Meindl Sit-with  
When: Wednesday, August 15, 2018 2:00 PM-2:30 PM (UTC-06:00) Central Time (US & Canada).  
Where: Houston office- Rm 225, conference call number provided 

From the Sit With Guidance document: 
PAGS Sit-With Guidance 
What is a sit-with? 
A sit-with is a one-on-one feedback coaching session between a manager and staff.  Staff will  
participate in an initial sit-with with their manager, during which they will discuss their previous disaster roles, particular 
technical specialties and skill sets. This discussion will inform leadership on the level of complexity for a staff’s assignment. 

4

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Please note that a sit-with is a one-on-one meeting and all of these alleged “sit-withs” were group hugs without the 
benefit of the hug, more like a ganging up on the new guy. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Lancaster, Dacia  
Sent: Friday, October 19, 2018 5:38 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-AID-Administrative Investigations Directive Committee <FEMA-AID-
AdministrativeInvestigationsDirectiveCommittee@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: OER AHU-18-164 Closure Letter 

Good afternoon, 

Please see the attached response from the Office of Equal Rights, Director. 

V/r, 

Dacia Lancaster 
Anti-Harassment Unit 
Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/FEMA 

5

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, October 30, 2018 11:45 AM
Lancaster, Dacia; FEMA.Harassment
FEMA-AID-Administrative Investigations Directive Committee
RE: OER AHU-18-164 Closure Letter
PAGS Sit With Guidance-10-26-18.pdf

Another issue to keep in mind is that the meetings I am having concerns about were called “Sit-With”, see below.  Policy 
was violated in even calling these meetings sit-withs, in my opinion. 

-----Original Appointment-----  
From: Harrison, Jade Sent: Tuesday, August 14, 2018 6:38 PM  
To: Meindl, Max; Terry, Detra; Slie, Brian Subject: M. Meindl Sit-with  
When: Wednesday, August 15, 2018 2:00 PM-2:30 PM (UTC-06:00) Central Time (US & Canada).  
Where: Houston office- Rm 225, conference call number provided 

From the Sit With Guidance document: 
PAGS Sit-With Guidance 
What is a sit-with? 
A sit-with is a one-on-one feedback coaching session between a manager and staff.  Staff will  
participate in an initial sit-with with their manager, during which they will discuss their previous disaster roles, particular 
technical specialties and skill sets. This discussion will inform leadership on the level of complexity for a staff’s assignment. 

Please note that a sit-with is a one-on-one meeting and all of these alleged “sit-withs” were group hugs without the 
benefit of the hug, more like a ganging up on the new guy. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Lancaster, Dacia  
Sent: Friday, October 19, 2018 5:38 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-AID-Administrative Investigations Directive Committee <FEMA-AID-
AdministrativeInvestigationsDirectiveCommittee@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: OER AHU-18-164 Closure Letter 

6

 
 
 
 
 
 
Good afternoon, 

Please see the attached response from the Office of Equal Rights, Director. 

V/r, 

Dacia Lancaster 
Anti-Harassment Unit 
Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/FEMA 

7

 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, October 30, 2018 11:07 AM
femamax@gmail.com
FW: sit with comms
RE: M. Meindl Sit-with; RE: M. Meindl Sit-with; RE: M. Meindl Sit-with; RE: M. Meindl Sit-
with

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, September 12, 2018 1:28 PM 
To: Walters, Albert <Albert.Walters@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: sit with comms 

For your information, the sit with email chain that triggered the harassment filing. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

8

 
 
 
 
 
 
9

  
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, October 30, 2018 11:05 AM
femamax@gmail.com
FW: OER AHU-18-164 Closure Letter
Albert.pdf

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, October 30, 2018 11:03 AM 
To: Lancaster, Dacia <Dacia.Lancaster@fema.dhs.gov>; FEMA.Harassment <fema.harassment@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-OCSO-MISCON <fema-ocso-miscon@fema.dhs.gov>; Grant, Raphael <raphael.grant@fema.dhs.gov>; Hass, 
Andrew <andrew.hass@fema.dhs.gov>; Hayes, Ashton <ashton.hayes@fema.dhs.gov>; Hoburg, Leigh 
<Leigh.Hoburg@fema.dhs.gov>; Jackson, Robyne <Robyne.Jackson@fema.dhs.gov>; Jaeger, Michelle 
<michelle.jaeger@fema.dhs.gov>; Murrock, Kristin <kristin.murrock@fema.dhs.gov>; Pellicci, Kelley 
<Kelley.Pellicci@fema.dhs.gov>; Piper, Dalita <dalita.piper@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: OER AHU-18-164 Closure Letter 

To whom it may concern, 
I find the letter closing this complaint of harassment specious and inaccurate at best. 
The statement that an investigation was conducted and “witness statement” and/or “evidence collected” led to 
allegations being unsubstantiated, is interesting at a minimum. 
Pursuant to the attachment in this email and a copy of a previously sent email, sent to, what I assume to be the primary 
investigator, stipulated in no uncertain terms that there were no witnesses to the alleged harassment and that the 
harassment was my perception of an escalation or a previous meeting wherein I had been inappropriately accused and 
unprofessionally addressed in front of other parties. 
The harassment claim has to do with my perception of the escalation only, no witnesses involved. 

Below is a copy of the email stipulating my concerns when I filed the complaint: 

From: Meindl, Max  

10

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sent: Wednesday, September 12, 2018 1:19 PM 
To: Walters, Albert <Albert.Walters@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: cover email 
I am, after a couple of weeks of considerable handwringing and possible/potential blowback considerations, hereby submitting the 
attached complaint, although I am very concerned about retaliation. 
I have been falsely accused, in my opinion, and it appears the parties involved are escalating the issue to the possible detriment of my 
employment. 
I categorically deny the allegations and assertions as put forth. 
I have had a very successful tenure with FEMA since 09/2017 when deployed to the Beaumont East team. 
I was a high producer of “applicant signed projects” and continue to do the same here as demonstrated in the Grants Manager 
Metrics. 
I never had any problem with “communications” until all of the sudden I can’t seem to do anything correct in my current deployment 
here in Houston. 
I am dismayed with the process and attitude of the parties, the guilty until proven innocent prevailing mindset is inherently unfair. 
A sit-with summary by TK Shadowens before my meeting with the DPAG could best described as “Fiction” because we never discussed 
the items in his summary report and I advised he and DPAG of the same. 
Show me a specific example of the alleged “communication” or “body language” issue.   
I have been falsely accused and convicted without any consideration for my perspective or statements to clarify. 
I am submitting this to you as HR in confidence and would like to request a contact to the EEO group so I can file with them also 
because I feel this issue revolves around my disability and needs to be addressed. 
I would also request a contact to ADR so I can pursue that avenue as well. 
Please contact me with any questions, guidance, advice if required. 
Please advise soonest. 

Thank you in advance. 
Max Meindl 
832-293-3671 

FEMA PDMG 
Houston PA 
202-374-9426 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Lancaster, Dacia  
Sent: Friday, October 19, 2018 5:38 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-AID-Administrative Investigations Directive Committee <FEMA-AID-

11

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AdministrativeInvestigationsDirectiveCommittee@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: OER AHU-18-164 Closure Letter 

Good afternoon, 

Please see the attached response from the Office of Equal Rights, Director. 

V/r, 

Dacia Lancaster 
Anti-Harassment Unit 
Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/FEMA 

12

 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:

Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, October 30, 2018 11:03 AM
Lancaster, Dacia; FEMA.Harassment
FEMA-OCSO-MISCON; Grant, Raphael; Hass, Andrew; Hayes, Ashton; Hoburg, Leigh; 
Jackson, Robyne; Jaeger, Michelle; Murrock, Kristin; Pellicci, Kelley; Piper, Dalita
RE: OER AHU-18-164 Closure Letter
Albert.pdf

To whom it may concern, 
I find the letter closing this complaint of harassment specious and inaccurate at best. 
The statement that an investigation was conducted and “witness statement” and/or “evidence collected” led to 
allegations being unsubstantiated, is interesting at a minimum. 
Pursuant to the attachment in this email and a copy of a previously sent email, sent to, what I assume to be the primary 
investigator, stipulated in no uncertain terms that there were no witnesses to the alleged harassment and that the 
harassment was my perception of an escalation or a previous meeting wherein I had been inappropriately accused and 
unprofessionally addressed in front of other parties. 
The harassment claim has to do with my perception of the escalation only, no witnesses involved. 

Below is a copy of the email stipulating my concerns when I filed the complaint: 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, September 12, 2018 1:19 PM 
To: Walters, Albert <Albert.Walters@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: cover email 
I am, after a couple of weeks of considerable handwringing and possible/potential blowback considerations, hereby submitting the 
attached complaint, although I am very concerned about retaliation. 
I have been falsely accused, in my opinion, and it appears the parties involved are escalating the issue to the possible detriment of my 
employment. 
I categorically deny the allegations and assertions as put forth. 
I have had a very successful tenure with FEMA since 09/2017 when deployed to the Beaumont East team. 
I was a high producer of “applicant signed projects” and continue to do the same here as demonstrated in the Grants Manager 
Metrics. 
I never had any problem with “communications” until all of the sudden I can’t seem to do anything correct in my current deployment 
here in Houston. 
I am dismayed with the process and attitude of the parties, the guilty until proven innocent prevailing mindset is inherently unfair. 
A sit-with summary by TK Shadowens before my meeting with the DPAG could best described as “Fiction” because we never discussed 
the items in his summary report and I advised he and DPAG of the same. 
Show me a specific example of the alleged “communication” or “body language” issue.   
I have been falsely accused and convicted without any consideration for my perspective or statements to clarify. 
I am submitting this to you as HR in confidence and would like to request a contact to the EEO group so I can file with them also 
because I feel this issue revolves around my disability and needs to be addressed. 
I would also request a contact to ADR so I can pursue that avenue as well. 
Please contact me with any questions, guidance, advice if required. 
Please advise soonest. 

Thank you in advance. 
Max Meindl 
832-293-3671 

FEMA PDMG 
Houston PA 

13

 
 
 
 
202-374-9426 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Lancaster, Dacia  
Sent: Friday, October 19, 2018 5:38 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-AID-Administrative Investigations Directive Committee <FEMA-AID-
AdministrativeInvestigationsDirectiveCommittee@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: OER AHU-18-164 Closure Letter 

Good afternoon, 

Please see the attached response from the Office of Equal Rights, Director. 

V/r, 

Dacia Lancaster 
Anti-Harassment Unit 
Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/FEMA 

14

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:
Attachments:

Good afternoon, 

Lancaster, Dacia
Friday, October 19, 2018 5:38 PM
Meindl, Max
FEMA-AID-Administrative Investigations Directive Committee
OER AHU-18-164 Closure Letter
scannedDoc (007).pdf

Please see the attached response from the Office of Equal Rights, Director. 

V/r, 

Dacia Lancaster 
Anti-Harassment Unit 
Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/FEMA 

15

 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Castaneda, Melinda
Monday, October 15, 2018 11:14 AM
FEMA-4332-DR-TX-All-Hands
TRO-ADR Continuous Availability

See important message from ADR.  Thank you. 

Please forward your questions to the appropriate Point of Contact 

Greetings, 

I’m writing to let you know that I will be out on rotation until 10/29. I will still be 
intermittently available via phone/e-mail. 

ADR Advisor Sunny Gutierrez will be here at the TRO while I’m out.  Sunny served 
the Texas Mission previously, so she may be familiar to some of you. 
ADR Advisors Judy Gordon and Carl McGill will continue serving at Branch II Houston 
and providing coverage for Branch III. 

Please feel free to contact any of us. 

Thank you for all you do, every day.   
Take good care of yourselves and each other. 

Aileen  

AILEEN DENTON SETTER 
Alternative Dispute Resolution Advisor 
Texas Recovery Office 
11000 North Interstate Highway 35 
Austin, TX  78753 
FEMA iPhone:  (225) 910-5254 
E-mail: Aileen.DentonSetter@fema.dhs.gov  

16

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, October 9, 2018 9:43 AM
Asaro, Karen; Walters, Albert
RE: HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint

I am available as required  and at any time convenient to all parties. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Asaro, Karen  
Sent: Sunday, October 7, 2018 3:20 PM 
To: Walters, Albert <Albert.Walters@fema.dhs.gov>; Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint 

Thank you.  As soon as I hear from Mr. Meindl, I will confirm the date/time. 

Karen 

Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 
Washington, DC 20472 
Phone: 571 431-2863 

This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic 
communication and may contain confidential and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is 
not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this 
message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and 
delete this message. Thank you. 

From: Walters, Albert  
Sent: Saturday, October 6, 2018 9:06 AM 

17

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To: Asaro, Karen <Karen.Asaro@fema.dhs.gov>; Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint 

Good morning Ms. Asaro, 

My availability for a discussion with Mr. Meindl over the next 2 weeks is: 

October 11, 2018 – From 10:00am until 2:00pm 
October 12, 2018 – From 10:00am until 2:00pm 
October 15, 2018 – From 11:00am until 3:00pm 
October 17, 2018 – From 1:00pm until 2:00pm 
October 19, 2018 – From 10:00am until 2:00pm 

Thanks, 

Albert P. Walters III 
Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
Disaster 4332 – Harvey 
Cell Phone 504-570-4412 
Albert.Walters@FEMA.DHS.GOV 

From: Asaro, Karen  
Sent: Sunday, September 30, 2018 12:10 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>; Walters, Albert <Albert.Walters@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint 

Hello Mr. Meindl and Mr. Walters, 

I received an email from Erik Skinner, OER, on Friday letting me know that things are on track for scheduling the 
mediation conference call. 

I will be at a mediation conference this week (week of Oct. 1) and unavailable for mediation.  If you could send me some 
dates you are available the week of Oct. 8 and the week of Oct. 15,  I will coordinate with all of our schedules, and 
confirm the first date/time that works for everyone. 

Thank you for your assistance with scheduling and I look forward to hearing from you, 

Karen 

Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 
Washington, DC 20472 
Phone: 571 431-2863 

This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic 
communication and may contain confidential and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is 
not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this 

18

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and 
delete this message. Thank you. 

19

 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Asaro, Karen
Sunday, October 7, 2018 3:20 PM
Walters, Albert; Meindl, Max
RE: HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint

Thank you.  As soon as I hear from Mr. Meindl, I will confirm the date/time. 

Karen 

Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 
Washington, DC 20472 
Phone: 571 431-2863 

This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic 
communication and may contain confidential and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is 
not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this 
message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and 
delete this message. Thank you. 

From: Walters, Albert  
Sent: Saturday, October 6, 2018 9:06 AM 
To: Asaro, Karen <Karen.Asaro@fema.dhs.gov>; Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint 

Good morning Ms. Asaro, 

My availability for a discussion with Mr. Meindl over the next 2 weeks is: 

October 11, 2018 – From 10:00am until 2:00pm 
October 12, 2018 – From 10:00am until 2:00pm 
October 15, 2018 – From 11:00am until 3:00pm 
October 17, 2018 – From 1:00pm until 2:00pm 
October 19, 2018 – From 10:00am until 2:00pm 

Thanks, 

Albert P. Walters III 
Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
Disaster 4332 – Harvey 
Cell Phone 504-570-4412 
Albert.Walters@FEMA.DHS.GOV 

20

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From: Asaro, Karen  
Sent: Sunday, September 30, 2018 12:10 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>; Walters, Albert <Albert.Walters@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint 

Hello Mr. Meindl and Mr. Walters, 

I received an email from Erik Skinner, OER, on Friday letting me know that things are on track for scheduling the 
mediation conference call. 

I will be at a mediation conference this week (week of Oct. 1) and unavailable for mediation.  If you could send me some 
dates you are available the week of Oct. 8 and the week of Oct. 15,  I will coordinate with all of our schedules, and 
confirm the first date/time that works for everyone. 

Thank you for your assistance with scheduling and I look forward to hearing from you, 

Karen 

Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 
Washington, DC 20472 
Phone: 571 431-2863 

This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic 
communication and may contain confidential and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is 
not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this 
message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and 
delete this message. Thank you. 

21

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Good morning Ms. Asaro, 

Walters, Albert
Saturday, October 6, 2018 8:06 AM
Asaro, Karen; Meindl, Max
RE: HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint

My availability for a discussion with Mr. Meindl over the next 2 weeks is: 

October 11, 2018 – From 10:00am until 2:00pm 
October 12, 2018 – From 10:00am until 2:00pm 
October 15, 2018 – From 11:00am until 3:00pm 
October 17, 2018 – From 1:00pm until 2:00pm 
October 19, 2018 – From 10:00am until 2:00pm 

Thanks, 

Albert P. Walters III 
Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
Disaster 4332 – Harvey 
Cell Phone 504-570-4412 
Albert.Walters@FEMA.DHS.GOV 

From: Asaro, Karen  
Sent: Sunday, September 30, 2018 12:10 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>; Walters, Albert <Albert.Walters@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint 

Hello Mr. Meindl and Mr. Walters, 

I received an email from Erik Skinner, OER, on Friday letting me know that things are on track for scheduling the 
mediation conference call. 

I will be at a mediation conference this week (week of Oct. 1) and unavailable for mediation.  If you could send me some 
dates you are available the week of Oct. 8 and the week of Oct. 15,  I will coordinate with all of our schedules, and 
confirm the first date/time that works for everyone. 

Thank you for your assistance with scheduling and I look forward to hearing from you, 

Karen 

Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 
Washington, DC 20472 

22

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Phone: 571 431-2863 

This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic 
communication and may contain confidential and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is 
not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this 
message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and 
delete this message. Thank you. 

23

 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Asaro, Karen
Sunday, September 30, 2018 12:10 PM
Meindl, Max; Walters, Albert
HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint

Hello Mr. Meindl and Mr. Walters, 

I received an email from Erik Skinner, OER, on Friday letting me know that things are on track for scheduling the 
mediation conference call. 

I will be at a mediation conference this week (week of Oct. 1) and unavailable for mediation.  If you could send me some 
dates you are available the week of Oct. 8 and the week of Oct. 15,  I will coordinate with all of our schedules, and 
confirm the first date/time that works for everyone. 

Thank you for your assistance with scheduling and I look forward to hearing from you, 

Karen 

Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 
Washington, DC 20472 
Phone: 571 431-2863 

This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic 
communication and may contain confidential and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is 
not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this 
message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and 
delete this message. Thank you. 

24

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

For the file. 

Meindl, Max
Thursday, September 13, 2018 9:00 AM
Walters, Albert
ADDITIONAL STATEMENT
Albert.pdf

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

25

 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, September 12, 2018 1:28 PM
Walters, Albert
sit with comms
RE: M. Meindl Sit-with; RE: M. Meindl Sit-with; RE: M. Meindl Sit-with; RE: M. Meindl Sit-
with

For your information, the sit with email chain that triggered the harassment filing. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

26

 
  
 
Meindl, Max

Subject:
Location:

Start:
End:
Show Time As:

Canceled: M. Meindl Sit-with
Houston office- Rm 225, conference call number provided

Wed 8/15/2018 2:00 PM
Wed 8/15/2018 2:30 PM
Free

Recurrence:

(none)

Meeting Status:

Not yet responded

Organizer:
Required Attendees:

Harrison, Jade
Meindl, Max; Terry, Detra; Slie, Brian

Importance:

High

Brian, 

You can use the below number to conference in tomorrow. 

Conference Call number: 
1-800-320-4330 

PIN: 892515 

27

 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Albert, 
Per your request. 

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, September 12, 2018 1:19 PM
Walters, Albert
cover email

I am, after a couple of weeks of considerable handwringing and possible/potential blowback considerations, hereby 
submitting the attached complaint, although I am very concerned about retaliation. 
I have been falsely accused, in my opinion, and it appears the parties involved are escalating the issue to the possible 
detriment of my employment. 
I categorically deny the allegations and assertions as put forth. 
I have had a very successful tenure with FEMA since 09/2017 when deployed to the Beaumont East team. 
I was a high producer of “applicant signed projects” and continue to do the same here as demonstrated in the Grants 
Manager Metrics. 
I never had any problem with “communications” until all of the sudden I can’t seem to do anything correct in my current 
deployment here in Houston. 
I am dismayed with the process and attitude of the parties, the guilty until proven innocent prevailing mindset is 
inherently unfair. 
A sit-with summary by TK Shadowens before my meeting with the DPAG could best described as “Fiction” because we 
never discussed the items in his summary report and I advised he and DPAG of the same. 
Show me a specific example of the alleged “communication” or “body language” issue.   
I have been falsely accused and convicted without any consideration for my perspective or statements to clarify. 
I am submitting this to you as HR in confidence and would like to request a contact to the EEO group so I can file with 
them also because I feel this issue revolves around my disability and needs to be addressed. 
I would also request a contact to ADR so I can pursue that avenue as well. 
Please contact me with any questions, guidance, advice if required. 
Please advise soonest. 

Thank you in advance. 
Max Meindl 
832-293-3671 

FEMA PDMG 
Houston PA 
202-374-9426 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

28

 
 
 
 
  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

29

 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Hello Mr. Walters, 

Asaro, Karen
Wednesday, September 12, 2018 9:55 AM
Walters, Albert; Meindl, Max
RE: EEO Mediation

I assumed as much and just wanted to clarify for Mr. Meindl that your meeting was not the mediation session since he 
forwarded the meeting request to me. 

Thanks, 
Karen 

Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 
Washington, DC 20472 
Phone: 571 431-2863 

This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic 
communication and may contain confidential and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is 
not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this 
message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and 
delete this message. Thank you. 

From: Walters, Albert  
Sent: Wednesday, September 12, 2018 10:53 AM 
To: Asaro, Karen <Karen.Asaro@fema.dhs.gov>; Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Re: EEO Mediation 

Karen, 

This meeting is in reference to a harassment complaint Max has filed. 

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Asaro, Karen 
Sent: Wednesday, September 12, 2018 9:23:57 AM 
To: Meindl, Max; Walters, Albert 
Subject: EEO Mediation  

Hello Mr. Meindl and Mr. Walters, 

Mr. Meindl forwarded a meeting request to me which as I understand it, Mr. Walters is requesting a meeting with Mr. 
Meindl to discuss the EEO complaint. 

30

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
I am writing to clarify that this meeting is NOT part of the mediation conference call I am trying to schedule once I know 
both parties’ availability. 

Thank you, 

Karen 

Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 
Washington, DC 20472 
Phone: 571 431-2863 

This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic 
communication and may contain confidential and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is 
not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this 
message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and 
delete this message. Thank you. 

31

  
  
  
  
 
  
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Karen, 

Walters, Albert
Wednesday, September 12, 2018 9:53 AM
Asaro, Karen; Meindl, Max
Re: EEO Mediation

This meeting is in reference to a harassment complaint Max has filed. 

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Asaro, Karen 
Sent: Wednesday, September 12, 2018 9:23:57 AM 
To: Meindl, Max; Walters, Albert 
Subject: EEO Mediation  

Hello Mr. Meindl and Mr. Walters, 

Mr. Meindl forwarded a meeting request to me which as I understand it, Mr. Walters is requesting a meeting with Mr. 
Meindl to discuss the EEO complaint. 

I am writing to clarify that this meeting is NOT part of the mediation conference call I am trying to schedule once I know 
both parties’ availability. 

Thank you, 

Karen 

Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 
Washington, DC 20472 
Phone: 571 431-2863 

This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic 
communication and may contain confidential and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is 
not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this 
message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and 
delete this message. Thank you. 

32

 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Asaro, Karen
Wednesday, September 12, 2018 9:24 AM
Meindl, Max; Walters, Albert
EEO Mediation

Hello Mr. Meindl and Mr. Walters, 

Mr. Meindl forwarded a meeting request to me which as I understand it, Mr. Walters is requesting a meeting with Mr. 
Meindl to discuss the EEO complaint. 

I am writing to clarify that this meeting is NOT part of the mediation conference call I am trying to schedule once I know 
both parties’ availability. 

Thank you, 

Karen 

Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 
Washington, DC 20472 
Phone: 571 431-2863 

This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic 
communication and may contain confidential and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is 
not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this 
message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and 
delete this message. Thank you. 

33

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, September 12, 2018 9:23 AM
Walters, Albert
Accepted: Statement Concerning - Harassment 

34

 
Meindl, Max

Subject:
Location:

Start:
End:

Statement Concerning - Harassment 
My Office 

Wed 9/12/2018 1:00 PM
Wed 9/12/2018 2:00 PM

Recurrence:

(none)

Meeting Status:

Accepted

Organizer:
Required Attendees:
Optional Attendees:

Walters, Albert
Walters, Albert; Meindl, Max
Asaro, Karen; Jordan, Lakeisha

Good Evening Max, 

I would like to get your statement concerning your complaint. Please be prepared to discuss the issue.. 

Albert 

35

 
 
Meindl, Max

Subject:
Location:

Start:
End:

Statement Concerning - Harassment 
My Office 

Wed 9/12/2018 1:00 PM
Wed 9/12/2018 2:00 PM

Recurrence:

(none)

Meeting Status:

Accepted

Organizer:
Required Attendees:
Optional Attendees:

Walters, Albert
Walters, Albert; Meindl, Max
Asaro, Karen; Jordan, Lakeisha

Good Evening Max, 

I would like to get your statement concerning your complaint. Please be prepared to discuss the issue.. 

Albert 

36

 
 
Meindl, Max

Subject:
Location:

Start:
End:

Statement Concerning - Harassment 
My Office 

Wed 9/12/2018 1:00 PM
Wed 9/12/2018 2:00 PM

Recurrence:

(none)

Meeting Status:

Accepted

Organizer:
Required Attendees:
Optional Attendees:

Walters, Albert
Walters, Albert; Meindl, Max
Asaro, Karen; Jordan, Lakeisha

Good Evening Max, 

I would like to get your statement concerning your complaint. Please be prepared to discuss the issue.. 

Albert 

37

 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

10-4 

Meindl, Max
Thursday, September 6, 2018 9:36 AM
Asaro, Karen
RE: mediation conference call

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Asaro, Karen  
Sent: Thursday, September 6, 2018 8:35 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: mediation conference call 

Hello Mr. Meindl, 

I am still waiting to hear back from Mr. Walters regarding his availability.  I will let you know once I have heard from him. 

Thanks, 
Karen 

Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 
Washington, DC 20472 
Phone: 571 431-2863 

This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic 
communication and may contain confidential and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is 
not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this 
message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and 
delete this message. Thank you. 

38

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, September 4, 2018 3:13 PM 
To: Asaro, Karen <Karen.Asaro@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: mediation conference call 

1.  Thursday before 1:00 PM,  
2.  Wed. next week 09:00 to 15:00,  
3.  Thursday next week 09:00 to 15:00. 

I am in the office until about noon tomorrow but not sure about availability of a tele-conference room or anything. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Asaro, Karen  
Sent: Tuesday, September 4, 2018 1:56 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: mediation conference call 

Hello Mr. Meindl, 

Thank you for speaking with me today regarding the mediation conference call.  If you can send me several dates that 
you are available for scheduling mediation,  I will coordinate with Mr. Walters’ availability and confirm the earliest date 
that works with everyone’s schedule. 

Thank you, 

Karen 

Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 
Washington, DC 20472 
Phone: 571 431-2863 

This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic 
communication and may contain confidential and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is 

39

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this 
message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and 
delete this message. Thank you. 

40

 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Hello Mr. Meindl, 

Asaro, Karen
Thursday, September 6, 2018 8:35 AM
Meindl, Max
RE: mediation conference call

I am still waiting to hear back from Mr. Walters regarding his availability.  I will let you know once I have heard from him. 

Thanks, 
Karen 

Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 
Washington, DC 20472 
Phone: 571 431-2863 

This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic 
communication and may contain confidential and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is 
not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this 
message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and 
delete this message. Thank you. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, September 4, 2018 3:13 PM 
To: Asaro, Karen <Karen.Asaro@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: mediation conference call 

1.  Thursday before 1:00 PM,  
2.  Wed. next week 09:00 to 15:00,  
3.  Thursday next week 09:00 to 15:00. 

I am in the office until about noon tomorrow but not sure about availability of a tele-conference room or anything. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

41

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Asaro, Karen  
Sent: Tuesday, September 4, 2018 1:56 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: mediation conference call 

Hello Mr. Meindl, 

Thank you for speaking with me today regarding the mediation conference call.  If you can send me several dates that 
you are available for scheduling mediation,  I will coordinate with Mr. Walters’ availability and confirm the earliest date 
that works with everyone’s schedule. 

Thank you, 

Karen 

Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 
Washington, DC 20472 
Phone: 571 431-2863 

This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic 
communication and may contain confidential and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is 
not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this 
message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and 
delete this message. Thank you. 

42

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Done  

Get Outlook for iOS 

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, September 5, 2018 6:37 PM
Jones, Patricia
Re: IBD

From: Jones, Patricia 
Sent: Wednesday, September 5, 2018 3:12:18 PM 
To: Meindl, Max 
Cc: Boone, William; Slie, Brian 
Subject: IBD  

Good Afternoon, 

We have recently sent out your IBD, you can locate this in FED HR.   As of today yours has not been signed.  Please go 
into this site by COB tomorrow and sign these documents.   They will be reviewed on Friday by the Branch Director and 
Chief of Staff. 

Should you need assistance please contact me, 

Thanks so much, 
  Trisha 
Patricia Jones  
PA Ops Support Crew Leader 
DR-4332-TX 
202-706-2160 FEMA 

Patricia.jones1@fema.dhs.gov 

If nothing ever changed there’d be no Butterflies… 
With honor and integrity, we will safeguard the American people, our homeland, and our values. 

43

 
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Jones, Patricia
Wednesday, September 5, 2018 3:16 PM
Meindl, Max
IDP's 

Importance:

High

This is correcting the Subject line of the last email.    
It should read IDP.    Sorry for the error 

  Trisha 
Patricia Jones  
PA Ops Support Crew Leader 
DR-4332-TX 
202-706-2160 FEMA 

Patricia.jones1@fema.dhs.gov 

If nothing ever changed there’d be no Butterflies… 
With honor and integrity, we will safeguard the American people, our homeland, and our values. 

44

 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Good Afternoon, 

Jones, Patricia
Wednesday, September 5, 2018 3:12 PM
Meindl, Max
Boone, William; Slie, Brian
IBD

We have recently sent out your IBD, you can locate this in FED HR.   As of today yours has not been signed.  Please go 
into this site by COB tomorrow and sign these documents.   They will be reviewed on Friday by the Branch Director and 
Chief of Staff. 

Should you need assistance please contact me, 

Thanks so much, 
  Trisha 
Patricia Jones  
PA Ops Support Crew Leader 
DR-4332-TX 
202-706-2160 FEMA 

Patricia.jones1@fema.dhs.gov 

If nothing ever changed there’d be no Butterflies… 
With honor and integrity, we will safeguard the American people, our homeland, and our values. 

45

 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Good Afternoon, 

Jones, Patricia
Wednesday, September 5, 2018 3:08 PM
Meindl, Max
Boone, William; Slie, Brian
IBD 

We have recently sent out your IBD, you can locate this in FED HR.   As of today yours has not been signed.  Please go 
into this site by COB tomorrow and sign these documents.   They will be reviewed on Friday by the Branch Director and 
Chief of Staff. 

Should you need assistance please contact me, 

Thanks so much, 
  Trisha 
Patricia Jones  
PA Ops Support Crew Leader 
DR-4332-TX 
202-706-2160 FEMA 

Patricia.jones1@fema.dhs.gov 

If nothing ever changed there’d be no Butterflies… 
With honor and integrity, we will safeguard the American people, our homeland, and our values. 

46

 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

FYI 

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, September 5, 2018 10:55 AM
Jordan, Lakeisha
RE: Request for Availability - OER AHU Intake
Max Meindl-affidavit-signed.pdf

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Jordan, Lakeisha  
Sent: Wednesday, September 5, 2018 10:08 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Request for Availability - OER AHU Intake 

Good morning, Max,  

Thank you for your response. Are you still available to speak this morning before noon? If so, I will give you a call.  

If you are no longer available today, I will send you a calendar invite to speak tomorrow around 10:30AM.  

Thanks,  

Lakeisha Jordan 
Office of Equal Rights │ FEMA  
(202) 531-2978  

For Official Use Only - Privacy Act Sensitive. This document was prepared by DHS/FEMA and is covered by federal and 
state law governing electronic communications.  It may contain confidential, pre-decisional, and/or sensitive Government 
information, and is not for release, review, retransmission, dissemination or use by anyone other than the intended 

47

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
recipient.  Please consult the original sender before disclosing any information contained herein.  If you have received this 
in error, please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, September 4, 2018 4:34 PM 
To: Jordan, Lakeisha <lakeisha.jordan@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Request for Availability - OER AHU Intake 

Tomorrow before noon, Thursday before noon. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Jordan, Lakeisha  
Sent: Tuesday, September 4, 2018 3:31 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Request for Availability - OER AHU Intake 

Good afternoon, Max,  

I am an EEO Specialist in the Office of Equal Rights and your case was recently reassigned to me to conduct an 
intake on behalf of the Anti-Harassment Unit (AHU).  I would like to briefly speak to you to obtain the preliminary 
facts of your case.  

Can you please let me know the best available times to reach you this week, along with your phone number?   

Thanks,  

Lakeisha Jordan 
Office of Equal Rights │ FEMA  
(202) 531-2978  

For Official Use Only - Privacy Act Sensitive. This document was prepared by DHS/FEMA and is covered by 
federal and state law governing electronic communications.  It may contain confidential, pre-decisional, and/or 
sensitive Government information, and is not for release, review, retransmission, dissemination or use by anyone 
other than the intended recipient.  Please consult the original sender before disclosing any information contained 
herein.  If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

48

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
49

 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Good morning, Max,  

Jordan, Lakeisha
Wednesday, September 5, 2018 10:08 AM
Meindl, Max
RE: Request for Availability - OER AHU Intake

Thank you for your response. Are you still available to speak this morning before noon? If so, I will give you a call.  

If you are no longer available today, I will send you a calendar invite to speak tomorrow around 10:30AM.  

Thanks,  

Lakeisha Jordan 
Office of Equal Rights │ FEMA  
(202) 531-2978  

For Official Use Only - Privacy Act Sensitive. This document was prepared by DHS/FEMA and is covered by federal and 
state law governing electronic communications.  It may contain confidential, pre-decisional, and/or sensitive Government 
information, and is not for release, review, retransmission, dissemination or use by anyone other than the intended 
recipient.  Please consult the original sender before disclosing any information contained herein.  If you have received this 
in error, please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, September 4, 2018 4:34 PM 
To: Jordan, Lakeisha <lakeisha.jordan@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Request for Availability - OER AHU Intake 

Tomorrow before noon, Thursday before noon. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

50

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
From: Jordan, Lakeisha  
Sent: Tuesday, September 4, 2018 3:31 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Request for Availability - OER AHU Intake 

Good afternoon, Max,  

I am an EEO Specialist in the Office of Equal Rights and your case was recently reassigned to me to conduct an 
intake on behalf of the Anti-Harassment Unit (AHU).  I would like to briefly speak to you to obtain the preliminary 
facts of your case.  

Can you please let me know the best available times to reach you this week, along with your phone number?   

Thanks,  

Lakeisha Jordan 
Office of Equal Rights │ FEMA  
(202) 531-2978  

For Official Use Only - Privacy Act Sensitive. This document was prepared by DHS/FEMA and is covered by 
federal and state law governing electronic communications.  It may contain confidential, pre-decisional, and/or 
sensitive Government information, and is not for release, review, retransmission, dissemination or use by anyone 
other than the intended recipient.  Please consult the original sender before disclosing any information contained 
herein.  If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

51

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, September 4, 2018 3:34 PM
Jordan, Lakeisha
RE: Request for Availability - OER AHU Intake

Tomorrow before noon, Thursday before noon. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Jordan, Lakeisha  
Sent: Tuesday, September 4, 2018 3:31 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Request for Availability - OER AHU Intake 

Good afternoon, Max,  

I am an EEO Specialist in the Office of Equal Rights and your case was recently reassigned to me to conduct an 
intake on behalf of the Anti-Harassment Unit (AHU).  I would like to briefly speak to you to obtain the preliminary 
facts of your case.  

Can you please let me know the best available times to reach you this week, along with your phone number?   

Thanks,  

Lakeisha Jordan 
Office of Equal Rights │ FEMA  
(202) 531-2978  

For Official Use Only - Privacy Act Sensitive. This document was prepared by DHS/FEMA and is covered by 
federal and state law governing electronic communications.  It may contain confidential, pre-decisional, and/or 
sensitive Government information, and is not for release, review, retransmission, dissemination or use by anyone 

52

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
other than the intended recipient.  Please consult the original sender before disclosing any information contained 
herein.  If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

53

 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Good afternoon, Max,  

Jordan, Lakeisha
Tuesday, September 4, 2018 3:31 PM
Meindl, Max
Request for Availability - OER AHU Intake

I am an EEO Specialist in the Office of Equal Rights and your case was recently reassigned to me to conduct an 
intake on behalf of the Anti-Harassment Unit (AHU).  I would like to briefly speak to you to obtain the preliminary 
facts of your case.  

Can you please let me know the best available times to reach you this week, along with your phone number?   

Thanks,  

Lakeisha Jordan 
Office of Equal Rights │ FEMA  
(202) 531-2978  

For Official Use Only - Privacy Act Sensitive. This document was prepared by DHS/FEMA and is covered by 
federal and state law governing electronic communications.  It may contain confidential, pre-decisional, and/or 
sensitive Government information, and is not for release, review, retransmission, dissemination or use by anyone 
other than the intended recipient.  Please consult the original sender before disclosing any information contained 
herein.  If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

54

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, September 4, 2018 2:13 PM
Asaro, Karen
RE: mediation conference call

1.  Thursday before 1:00 PM,  
2.  Wed. next week 09:00 to 15:00,  
3.  Thursday next week 09:00 to 15:00. 

I am in the office until about noon tomorrow but not sure about availability of a tele-conference room or anything. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Asaro, Karen  
Sent: Tuesday, September 4, 2018 1:56 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: mediation conference call 

Hello Mr. Meindl, 

Thank you for speaking with me today regarding the mediation conference call.  If you can send me several dates that 
you are available for scheduling mediation,  I will coordinate with Mr. Walters’ availability and confirm the earliest date 
that works with everyone’s schedule. 

Thank you, 

Karen 

Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 
Washington, DC 20472 
Phone: 571 431-2863 

55

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic 
communication and may contain confidential and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is 
not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this 
message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and 
delete this message. Thank you. 

56

 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Hello Mr. Meindl, 

Asaro, Karen
Tuesday, September 4, 2018 1:56 PM
Meindl, Max
mediation conference call

Thank you for speaking with me today regarding the mediation conference call.  If you can send me several dates that 
you are available for scheduling mediation,  I will coordinate with Mr. Walters’ availability and confirm the earliest date 
that works with everyone’s schedule. 

Thank you, 

Karen 

Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 
Washington, DC 20472 
Phone: 571 431-2863 

This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic 
communication and may contain confidential and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is 
not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this 
message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and 
delete this message. Thank you. 

57

 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Asaro, Karen
Tuesday, September 4, 2018 9:50 AM
Meindl, Max
RE: HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint

Sounds good.  I have a staff meeting from 12-1 pm (Eastern). 

Look forward to speaking with you, 

Karen 

Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 
Washington, DC 20472 
Phone: 571 431-2863 

This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic 
communication and may contain confidential and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is 
not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this 
message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and 
delete this message. Thank you. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, September 4, 2018 10:39 AM 
To: Asaro, Karen <Karen.Asaro@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint 

Let me catch up a bit on my projects and will call early afternoon. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

58

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From: Asaro, Karen  
Sent: Monday, September 3, 2018 9:29 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint 

Hello Mr. Meindl, 

The Office of Equal Rights (OER) has referred your EEO Complaint to the Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) Division 
for meditation.  I wanted to let you know that I am the mediator assigned.  I was hoping we could talk tomorrow, 
Tuesday, September 4.  My schedule if flexible so if you want to give me a call when you have time, I can be reached at 
571 431-2863.  If you happen to get my voice mail when you call, I probably will be on another call.  Just leave a call back 
number and I will return your call as soon as I am free. 

Thank you and I look forward to talking with you, 

Karen  

Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 
Washington, DC 20472 
Phone: 571 431-2863 

This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic 
communication and may contain confidential and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is 
not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this 
message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and 
delete this message. Thank you. 

59

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, September 4, 2018 9:39 AM
Asaro, Karen
RE: HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint

Let me catch up a bit on my projects and will call early afternoon. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Asaro, Karen  
Sent: Monday, September 3, 2018 9:29 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint 

Hello Mr. Meindl, 

The Office of Equal Rights (OER) has referred your EEO Complaint to the Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) Division 
for meditation.  I wanted to let you know that I am the mediator assigned.  I was hoping we could talk tomorrow, 
Tuesday, September 4.  My schedule if flexible so if you want to give me a call when you have time, I can be reached at 
571 431-2863.  If you happen to get my voice mail when you call, I probably will be on another call.  Just leave a call back 
number and I will return your call as soon as I am free. 

Thank you and I look forward to talking with you, 

Karen  

Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 
Washington, DC 20472 
Phone: 571 431-2863 

This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic 

60

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
communication and may contain confidential and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is 
not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this 
message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and 
delete this message. Thank you. 

61

 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Hello Mr. Meindl, 

Asaro, Karen
Monday, September 3, 2018 9:29 AM
Meindl, Max
HS-FEMA-02488-2018 EEO Complaint

The Office of Equal Rights (OER) has referred your EEO Complaint to the Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) Division 
for meditation.  I wanted to let you know that I am the mediator assigned.  I was hoping we could talk tomorrow, 
Tuesday, September 4.  My schedule if flexible so if you want to give me a call when you have time, I can be reached at 
571 431-2863.  If you happen to get my voice mail when you call, I probably will be on another call.  Just leave a call back 
number and I will return your call as soon as I am free. 

Thank you and I look forward to talking with you, 

Karen  

Karen Asaro, ADR Advisor 
FEMA Alternative Dispute Resolution Division 
500 C Street, SW, Suite 4NE 2407 
Washington, DC 20472 
Phone: 571 431-2863 

This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic 
communication and may contain confidential and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is 
not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this 
message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to the sender and 
delete this message. Thank you. 

62

 
 
 
 
 
 
Swann, Mary
Tuesday, August 28, 2018 1:59 PM
Meindl, Max
RE: Request of Additional Information

Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Hello Mr. Meindl, 

Thank you for your response. 

Respectfully, 

Mary Swann, EEO Specialist 
DHS-FEMA-OER 
3900 Karina Lane, Room 242 
Denton, TX 76202 
(940) 891-8573 (Ofc) 
(540) 504-2712 (eFAX) 
mary.swann@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, August 28, 2018 1:27 PM 
To: Swann, Mary <Mary.Swann@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Request of Additional Information 

Ms. Swann, 
Per your request: 

Please provide the following requested information by close of business today.   
I am in the process of contacting the responsible management official (RMO) regarding your claims.   
In your response to remedies/resolutions, you stated indeterminate.   
I will need you to provide some type/form of resolution to provide the RMO upon my contact. 

Also, please provide  
- the name and title of Ms. Harrison’s supervisor.   
              Brian C. Slie 

Deputy Infrastructure Branch Director  
DR 4332 TX JFO Austin 
Region 6 Infrastructure Branch 
DHS/FEMA 
940.368.9270 Cell 
Brian.slie@fema.dhs.gov 

- the names and titles of the management officials in your chain of command. 
              Detra Terry, Task Force Lead 
              Detra S. Terry 

Public Assistance-PDM/DIS 
DR-4332-TX 
202.718.0109|iFEMA cell 

63

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov 

              Albert P. Walters III 

Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
Disaster 4332 – Harvey 
Cell Phone 504-570-4412 
Albert.Walters@FEMA.DHS.GOV 

- and, please spell out the acronyms you have used throughout your report. 
              DPAG                  Deputy Public Assistance Group Lead 
              TAC PDMG         Technical Assistance Contractor Program Delivery Manager 
              PAPG                   Public Assistance Policy Guide 
              JFO                       Joint Field Office 
              TFL                       Task Force Lead 

PDMG                 Program Delivery Manager 

If you have questions, feel free to contact me at (940) 891-8573. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Swann, Mary  
Sent: Tuesday, August 28, 2018 9:43 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Request of Additional Information 

Good morning Mr. Meindl, 

Hope things are going well. 

Please provide the following requested information by close of business today.  I am in the process of 
contacting the responsible management official (RMO) regarding your claims.  In your response to 
remedies/resolutions, you stated indeterminate.  I will need you to provide some type/form of resolution 
to provide the RMO upon my contact. 

Also, please provide  
- the name and title of Ms. Harrison’s supervisor.   
- the names and titles of the management officials in your chain of command. 
- and, please spell out the acronyms you have used throughout your report. 

64

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
If you have questions, feel free to contact me at (940) 891-8573. 

Thank you in advance for your response and cooperation. 

Respectfully, 

Mary Swann, EEO Specialist 
DHS-FEMA Office of Equal Rights 
3900 Karina Lane, Room 242 
Denton, TX 76202 
(940) 891-8573 (Ofc) 
(540) 504-2712 (eFAX) 
mary.swann@fema.dhs.gov 

65

 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Ms. Swann, 
Per your request: 

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, August 28, 2018 1:27 PM
Swann, Mary
RE: Request of Additional Information

Please provide the following requested information by close of business today.   
I am in the process of contacting the responsible management official (RMO) regarding your claims.   
In your response to remedies/resolutions, you stated indeterminate.   
I will need you to provide some type/form of resolution to provide the RMO upon my contact. 

Also, please provide  
- the name and title of Ms. Harrison’s supervisor.   
              Brian C. Slie 

Deputy Infrastructure Branch Director  
DR 4332 TX JFO Austin 
Region 6 Infrastructure Branch 
DHS/FEMA 
940.368.9270 Cell 
Brian.slie@fema.dhs.gov 

- the names and titles of the management officials in your chain of command. 
              Detra Terry, Task Force Lead 
              Detra S. Terry 

Public Assistance-PDM/DIS 
DR-4332-TX 
202.718.0109|iFEMA cell 
detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov 

              Albert P. Walters III 

Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
Disaster 4332 – Harvey 
Cell Phone 504-570-4412 
Albert.Walters@FEMA.DHS.GOV 

- and, please spell out the acronyms you have used throughout your report. 
              DPAG                  Deputy Public Assistance Group Lead 
              TAC PDMG         Technical Assistance Contractor Program Delivery Manager 
              PAPG                   Public Assistance Policy Guide 
              JFO                       Joint Field Office 
              TFL                       Task Force Lead 

PDMG                 Program Delivery Manager 

If you have questions, feel free to contact me at (940) 891-8573. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 

66

 
 
 
 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Swann, Mary  
Sent: Tuesday, August 28, 2018 9:43 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Request of Additional Information 

Good morning Mr. Meindl, 

Hope things are going well. 

Please provide the following requested information by close of business today.  I am in the process of 
contacting the responsible management official (RMO) regarding your claims.  In your response to 
remedies/resolutions, you stated indeterminate.  I will need you to provide some type/form of resolution 
to provide the RMO upon my contact. 

Also, please provide  
- the name and title of Ms. Harrison’s supervisor.   
- the names and titles of the management officials in your chain of command. 
- and, please spell out the acronyms you have used throughout your report. 

If you have questions, feel free to contact me at (940) 891-8573. 

Thank you in advance for your response and cooperation. 

Respectfully, 

Mary Swann, EEO Specialist 
DHS-FEMA Office of Equal Rights 
3900 Karina Lane, Room 242 
Denton, TX 76202 
(940) 891-8573 (Ofc) 
(540) 504-2712 (eFAX) 
mary.swann@fema.dhs.gov 

67

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, August 28, 2018 11:43 AM
Henri, Foudiya
Goudy, Douglas
RE: Max Meindl request for Reasonable Accommodation

Hello Max, 
What is the name of your Supervisor please?_   DETRA TERRY 
Was the RA request sent to the Supervisor?       YES 
If yes please let me know.   
Also sent to:  From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 2:11 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Oke, Nicole <nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation 
<fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas <Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya 
<Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; femamax@gmail.com 
Subject: RA 

I can assist with the RA request ONLY. 

For Informal Complaint assistance please contact Doug Goudy directly.   

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Henri, Foudiya  
Sent: Tuesday, August 28, 2018 11:28 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Goudy, Douglas <Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Max Meindl request for Reasonable Accommodation 
Importance: High 

Hello Max, 

68

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
What is the name of your Supervisor please?_____________.  Was the RA request sent to the Supervisor? If yes please 
let me know.  I can assist with the RA request ONLY. 

For Informal Complaint assistance please contact Doug Goudy directly.   

Thank you, 
Foudiya Henri 
202-394-4633 Cell 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 2:11 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Oke, Nicole <nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; FEMA-Reasonable-
Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas <Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; 
Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; femamax@gmail.com 
Subject: RA 

Detra, 
RA form attached. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

69

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Good morning Mr. Meindl, 

Hope things are going well. 

Swann, Mary
Tuesday, August 28, 2018 9:43 AM
Meindl, Max
Request of Additional Information

Please provide the following requested information by close of business today.  I am in the process of 
contacting the responsible management official (RMO) regarding your claims.  In your response to 
remedies/resolutions, you stated indeterminate.  I will need you to provide some type/form of resolution 
to provide the RMO upon my contact. 

Also, please provide  
- the name and title of Ms. Harrison’s supervisor.   
- the names and titles of the management officials in your chain of command. 
- and, please spell out the acronyms you have used throughout your report. 

If you have questions, feel free to contact me at (940) 891-8573. 

Thank you in advance for your response and cooperation. 

Respectfully, 

Mary Swann, EEO Specialist 
DHS-FEMA Office of Equal Rights 
3900 Karina Lane, Room 242 
Denton, TX 76202 
(940) 891-8573 (Ofc) 
(540) 504-2712 (eFAX) 
mary.swann@fema.dhs.gov 

70

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

femamax@gmail.com
Sunday, August 26, 2018 3:42 PM
Meindl, Max
PIP
fema255-0-1.doc.docx

71

 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Thursday, August 23, 2018 3:18 PM
Swann, Mary
RE: Potential EEO Complaint
Consent.pdf; EEO Complainants Rights  Responsibilities (002)-signed.pdf; EEO Counselor 
Checklist (002)-signed.pdf; Max Meindl-affidavit-signed.pdf

If you believe you have been discriminated against and wish to pursue the EEO process, please provide the following 
information 
1.           your name, title and contact phone number; 
a.           Max Meindl, PMP, Emergency Management Specialist (PDMG), 832-293-3671 
2.           your work address and home address (do not provide a P.O. Box number);  
a.           8223 Willowplace Blvd, Houston TX.  (work) 
b.           5 E. Austin, Bellville, TX 77418 (home) 
3.           basis(es) of the alleged discrimination; 
a.           if age is the basis, provide date of birth; 06/21/1951 
b.           if disability is the basis, provide the name of disability;  coronary Artery Disease, possible/leading to Congestive 
Heart Failure (CHF) 
c.            if retaliation is the basis, provide date of prior EEO Activity or the incident you believe to be 
discriminatory;  Believe retaliation was for my determination of applicant eligibility in contravention to prevailing 
thought.  The issue with an applicant, City of Bellaire, pursuant my determination of a policy issue in contradiction to the 
prevailing point of view and that of the TAC PDMG. The apparent consensus for the issue at hand was that the applicant 
was not eligible for a specific claimed damage. After reviewing the available information in the PAPG and information sent 
from the JFO, I concluded that the applicant could possibly be eligible and proffered the opinion that asking or advising 
them to withdraw the claim was incorrect and not supported by the information I had reviewed and that it would be a 
disservice to the applicant to have them withdraw the claim as opposed to the issuance of a Determination Memo (DM). 
With a DM, the applicant at least retains the right to appeal whereas a withdrawal would result in no right to appeal, if I 
understand the process correctly. I had previously obtained approval from the Task Lead to submit an official “Policy 
Inquiry” to the policy team to obtain further clarification and direction. We, TFL and I, discussed the issue and agreed that 
waiting for the policy clarification would be the appropriate path to take. 

4.           a brief bullet list of each incident you believe to be discriminatory to include  
a.           name(s) of the alleged discriminating party; 
                             Jade Harrison 
c.            date(s) of the incident; and  
i.            July 26th 2018 
d.           name(s) of any witness to the alleged discrimination; 
i.            T.K. Shadowens 
e.           remedies/resolution to resolve your issues.  
i.            indeterminate 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

72

 
 
  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Swann, Mary  
Sent: Monday, August 20, 2018 1:09 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: Potential EEO Complaint 

Good afternoon Mr. Meindl, 

I will need your signature on each form (except “your Right to Equal Opportunity) before proceeding 
with the EEO process.  If you have questions, please call. 

Respectfully, 

Mary Swann, EEO Specialist 
Informal Team Unit 
Office of Equal Rights 
3900 Karina Lane 
Denton, TX 76202 
(940) 891-8573 (ofc) 
(540) 504-2712 (efax) 
mary.swann@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Swann, Mary  
Sent: Thursday, August 16, 2018 11:13 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: Potential EEO Complaint 

Good Morning, 

I apologize, did not include the EEO forms.  See attachments. 

Respectfully, 

Mary Swann, EEO Specialist 
Informal Team Unit 
Office of Equal Rights 
3900 Karina Lane 
Denton, TX 76202 
(940) 891-8573 (ofc) 
(540) 504-2712 (efax) 
mary.swann@fema.dhs.gov 

73

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From: Swann, Mary  
Sent: Thursday, August 16, 2018 11:09 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Potential EEO Complaint 

Good Morning, 

My name is Mary Swann, EEO Counselor in the Office of Equal Rights (OER).  Please let me know if you 
will be available on Monday, August 20, 2018 at 11:30am CST to discuss your potential request for EEO 
Counseling.  If the time is not convenient, provide a time.  I have attached the EEO Counseling forms (ADR 
Consent, Counseling Checklist, and Complainant’s Rights and Responsibilities) for your review before the 
scheduled meeting.  I will review the forms with you and address any questions you may have during the 
meeting.  I also attached a copy of FEMA OER flyer “Your Right to Equal Opportunity” which gives a brief 
explanation of the EEO Counseling process.  I will remind you that an individual has 45 days from the 
date of the alleged discriminatory incident to request EEO counseling. 

If you believe you have been discriminated against and wish to pursue the EEO process, please provide 
the following information 

- your name, title and contact phone number; 

- your work address and home address (do not provide a P.O. Box number);  

-  basis(es) of the alleged discrimination; 
    - if age is the basis, provide date of birth; 
    - if disability is the basis, provide the name of disability; 
    - if retaliation is the basis, provide date of prior EEO Activity or the incident you believe to be 
discriminatory; 

- a brief bullet list of each incident you believe to be discriminatory to include  
  - name(s) of the alleged discriminating party; 
  - date(s) of the incident; and  
  - name(s) of any witness to the alleged discrimination; 

- remedies/resolution to resolve your issues.  

Thank you in advance for your response. 

Respectfully, 

Mary Swann, EEO Specialist 
Informal Team Unit 
Office of Equal Rights 
3900 Karina Lane 
Denton, TX 76202 
(940) 891-8573 (ofc) 
(540) 504-2712 (efax) 
mary.swann@fema.dhs.gov 

74

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Goudy, Douglas
Thursday, August 23, 2018 1:11 PM
Meindl, Max
Automatic reply: RA

I'm currently out of the office returning August 27, 2018.  If you require immediate assistance please call (202) 212-3535 and follow prompt to 
leave message for the Informal Unit. 

75

 
      
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, August 21, 2018 2:53 PM
Denton Setter, Aileen
Accepted: Conversation

76

 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, August 21, 2018 10:00 AM
Jones, Patricia
RE: Conference Call for IDP's

Trisha, 
Thank you so much for the update. 
Have a great day! 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Jones, Patricia  
Sent: Tuesday, August 21, 2018 9:49 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Conference Call for IDP's 

Mr Meindl, 

The IDP form has been uploaded into FED HR Navigator.  You will be able to go there and digitally sign your IDB, Plan and 
2nd Quarter. The 308 is an expectation plan.  These are generic forms that need to be signed.   Bill Boone will be getting 
with you in a few months and proceed with the process.    

If you need assistance please reach out to me.  

Thanks, 
Trisha 

PatriciaJones ‘ Trisha’ 
PA Operation Support Crew Leader 
DR-4332-TX 
202-706-2160 FEMA 

77

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Patricia.jones1@fema.dhs.gov 

If nothing ever changed there’d be no Butterflies… 
With honor and integrity, we will safeguard the American people, our homeland, and our values. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Friday, August 17, 2018 4:27 PM 
To: Jones, Patricia <patricia.jones1@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Re: Conference Call for IDP's 

Per ATS and DTS I was off today and missed the call.  Please advise. 

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Jones, Patricia 
Sent: Friday, August 17, 2018 9:21:18 AM 
To: Boone, William; Atchison, Randy; Bambe, Dayo; Bazemore, Ronetta; Boyko, Brent; Carnes, Lingeria; Clebourn-
McPherson, Toya; Cress, Jack; In, Anthony; Kirk, Denise; Malbrough, Alfred; Meindl, Max; Nash, Julie; Pennisi, Emma; 
Riley Jr, Bernard; Terry, Detra; Walker, Daniel; White, Richard; Wick, Timothy; Wiltse, David 
Subject: Conference Call for IDP's 
When: Friday, August 17, 2018 10:00 AM-11:00 AM. 
Where: 1-800-320-4330 PIN 654321#  

Conference Call for IDP’s  
1-800-320-4330 
PIN 654321# 

78

 
 
 
 
  
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Mr Meindl, 

Jones, Patricia
Tuesday, August 21, 2018 9:49 AM
Meindl, Max
RE: Conference Call for IDP's

The IDP form has been uploaded into FED HR Navigator.  You will be able to go there and digitally sign your IDB, Plan and 
2nd Quarter. The 308 is an expectation plan.  These are generic forms that need to be signed.   Bill Boone will be getting 
with you in a few months and proceed with the process.    

If you need assistance please reach out to me.  

Thanks, 
Trisha 

PatriciaJones ‘ Trisha’ 
PA Operation Support Crew Leader 
DR-4332-TX 
202-706-2160 FEMA 

Patricia.jones1@fema.dhs.gov 

If nothing ever changed there’d be no Butterflies… 
With honor and integrity, we will safeguard the American people, our homeland, and our values. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Friday, August 17, 2018 4:27 PM 
To: Jones, Patricia <patricia.jones1@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Re: Conference Call for IDP's 

Per ATS and DTS I was off today and missed the call.  Please advise. 

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Jones, Patricia 
Sent: Friday, August 17, 2018 9:21:18 AM 
To: Boone, William; Atchison, Randy; Bambe, Dayo; Bazemore, Ronetta; Boyko, Brent; Carnes, Lingeria; Clebourn-
McPherson, Toya; Cress, Jack; In, Anthony; Kirk, Denise; Malbrough, Alfred; Meindl, Max; Nash, Julie; Pennisi, Emma; 
Riley Jr, Bernard; Terry, Detra; Walker, Daniel; White, Richard; Wick, Timothy; Wiltse, David 
Subject: Conference Call for IDP's 
When: Friday, August 17, 2018 10:00 AM-11:00 AM. 
Where: 1-800-320-4330 PIN 654321#  

Conference Call for IDP’s  
1-800-320-4330 

79

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
PIN 654321# 

80

Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Monday, August 20, 2018 5:45 PM
femamax@gmail.com
Fwd: Potential EEO Complaint

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Meindl, Max 
Sent: Monday, August 20, 2018 1:22:42 PM 
To: Swann, Mary 
Subject: RE: Potential EEO Complaint  

Will do, in the field with an applicant for the afternoon. 
Will do soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Swann, Mary  
Sent: Monday, August 20, 2018 1:09 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: Potential EEO Complaint 

Good afternoon Mr. Meindl, 

I will need your signature on each form (except “your Right to Equal Opportunity) before proceeding 
with the EEO process.  If you have questions, please call. 

Respectfully, 

Mary Swann, EEO Specialist 
Informal Team Unit 
Office of Equal Rights 

81

 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
3900 Karina Lane 
Denton, TX 76202 
(940) 891-8573 (ofc) 
(540) 504-2712 (efax) 
mary.swann@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Swann, Mary  
Sent: Thursday, August 16, 2018 11:13 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: Potential EEO Complaint 

Good Morning, 

I apologize, did not include the EEO forms.  See attachments. 

Respectfully, 

Mary Swann, EEO Specialist 
Informal Team Unit 
Office of Equal Rights 
3900 Karina Lane 
Denton, TX 76202 
(940) 891-8573 (ofc) 
(540) 504-2712 (efax) 
mary.swann@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Swann, Mary  
Sent: Thursday, August 16, 2018 11:09 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Potential EEO Complaint 

Good Morning, 

My name is Mary Swann, EEO Counselor in the Office of Equal Rights (OER).  Please let me know if you 
will be available on Monday, August 20, 2018 at 11:30am CST to discuss your potential request for EEO 
Counseling.  If the time is not convenient, provide a time.  I have attached the EEO Counseling forms (ADR 
Consent, Counseling Checklist, and Complainant’s Rights and Responsibilities) for your review before the 
scheduled meeting.  I will review the forms with you and address any questions you may have during the 
meeting.  I also attached a copy of FEMA OER flyer “Your Right to Equal Opportunity” which gives a brief 
explanation of the EEO Counseling process.  I will remind you that an individual has 45 days from the 
date of the alleged discriminatory incident to request EEO counseling. 

If you believe you have been discriminated against and wish to pursue the EEO process, please provide 
the following information 

- your name, title and contact phone number; 

- your work address and home address (do not provide a P.O. Box number);  

-  basis(es) of the alleged discrimination; 
    - if age is the basis, provide date of birth; 

82

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    - if disability is the basis, provide the name of disability; 
    - if retaliation is the basis, provide date of prior EEO Activity or the incident you believe to be 
discriminatory; 

- a brief bullet list of each incident you believe to be discriminatory to include  
  - name(s) of the alleged discriminating party; 
  - date(s) of the incident; and  
  - name(s) of any witness to the alleged discrimination; 

- remedies/resolution to resolve your issues.  

Thank you in advance for your response. 

Respectfully, 

Mary Swann, EEO Specialist 
Informal Team Unit 
Office of Equal Rights 
3900 Karina Lane 
Denton, TX 76202 
(940) 891-8573 (ofc) 
(540) 504-2712 (efax) 
mary.swann@fema.dhs.gov 

83

  
  
  
  
  
  
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Monday, August 20, 2018 1:23 PM
Swann, Mary
RE: Potential EEO Complaint

Will do, in the field with an applicant for the afternoon. 
Will do soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Swann, Mary  
Sent: Monday, August 20, 2018 1:09 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: Potential EEO Complaint 

Good afternoon Mr. Meindl, 

I will need your signature on each form (except “your Right to Equal Opportunity) before proceeding 
with the EEO process.  If you have questions, please call. 

Respectfully, 

Mary Swann, EEO Specialist 
Informal Team Unit 
Office of Equal Rights 
3900 Karina Lane 
Denton, TX 76202 
(940) 891-8573 (ofc) 
(540) 504-2712 (efax) 
mary.swann@fema.dhs.gov 

84

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From: Swann, Mary  
Sent: Thursday, August 16, 2018 11:13 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: Potential EEO Complaint 

Good Morning, 

I apologize, did not include the EEO forms.  See attachments. 

Respectfully, 

Mary Swann, EEO Specialist 
Informal Team Unit 
Office of Equal Rights 
3900 Karina Lane 
Denton, TX 76202 
(940) 891-8573 (ofc) 
(540) 504-2712 (efax) 
mary.swann@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Swann, Mary  
Sent: Thursday, August 16, 2018 11:09 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Potential EEO Complaint 

Good Morning, 

My name is Mary Swann, EEO Counselor in the Office of Equal Rights (OER).  Please let me know if you 
will be available on Monday, August 20, 2018 at 11:30am CST to discuss your potential request for EEO 
Counseling.  If the time is not convenient, provide a time.  I have attached the EEO Counseling forms (ADR 
Consent, Counseling Checklist, and Complainant’s Rights and Responsibilities) for your review before the 
scheduled meeting.  I will review the forms with you and address any questions you may have during the 
meeting.  I also attached a copy of FEMA OER flyer “Your Right to Equal Opportunity” which gives a brief 
explanation of the EEO Counseling process.  I will remind you that an individual has 45 days from the 
date of the alleged discriminatory incident to request EEO counseling. 

If you believe you have been discriminated against and wish to pursue the EEO process, please provide 
the following information 

- your name, title and contact phone number; 

- your work address and home address (do not provide a P.O. Box number);  

-  basis(es) of the alleged discrimination; 
    - if age is the basis, provide date of birth; 
    - if disability is the basis, provide the name of disability; 
    - if retaliation is the basis, provide date of prior EEO Activity or the incident you believe to be 
discriminatory; 

- a brief bullet list of each incident you believe to be discriminatory to include  
  - name(s) of the alleged discriminating party; 

85

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  - date(s) of the incident; and  
  - name(s) of any witness to the alleged discrimination; 

- remedies/resolution to resolve your issues.  

Thank you in advance for your response. 

Respectfully, 

Mary Swann, EEO Specialist 
Informal Team Unit 
Office of Equal Rights 
3900 Karina Lane 
Denton, TX 76202 
(940) 891-8573 (ofc) 
(540) 504-2712 (efax) 
mary.swann@fema.dhs.gov 

86

 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Good afternoon Mr. Meindl, 

Swann, Mary
Monday, August 20, 2018 1:09 PM
Meindl, Max
FW: Potential EEO Complaint
Your Right to Equal Opportunity 07 - 18.pdf; ADR.pdf; EEO Counselor Checklist.pdf; EEO 
Complainants Rights  Responsibilities.pdf

I will need your signature on each form (except “your Right to Equal Opportunity) before proceeding 
with the EEO process.  If you have questions, please call. 

Respectfully, 

Mary Swann, EEO Specialist 
Informal Team Unit 
Office of Equal Rights 
3900 Karina Lane 
Denton, TX 76202 
(940) 891-8573 (ofc) 
(540) 504-2712 (efax) 
mary.swann@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Swann, Mary  
Sent: Thursday, August 16, 2018 11:13 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: Potential EEO Complaint 

Good Morning, 

I apologize, did not include the EEO forms.  See attachments. 

Respectfully, 

Mary Swann, EEO Specialist 
Informal Team Unit 
Office of Equal Rights 
3900 Karina Lane 
Denton, TX 76202 
(940) 891-8573 (ofc) 
(540) 504-2712 (efax) 
mary.swann@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Swann, Mary  
Sent: Thursday, August 16, 2018 11:09 AM 

87

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Potential EEO Complaint 

Good Morning, 

My name is Mary Swann, EEO Counselor in the Office of Equal Rights (OER).  Please let me know if you 
will be available on Monday, August 20, 2018 at 11:30am CST to discuss your potential request for EEO 
Counseling.  If the time is not convenient, provide a time.  I have attached the EEO Counseling forms (ADR 
Consent, Counseling Checklist, and Complainant’s Rights and Responsibilities) for your review before the 
scheduled meeting.  I will review the forms with you and address any questions you may have during the 
meeting.  I also attached a copy of FEMA OER flyer “Your Right to Equal Opportunity” which gives a brief 
explanation of the EEO Counseling process.  I will remind you that an individual has 45 days from the 
date of the alleged discriminatory incident to request EEO counseling. 

If you believe you have been discriminated against and wish to pursue the EEO process, please provide 
the following information 

- your name, title and contact phone number; 

- your work address and home address (do not provide a P.O. Box number);  

-  basis(es) of the alleged discrimination; 
    - if age is the basis, provide date of birth; 
    - if disability is the basis, provide the name of disability; 
    - if retaliation is the basis, provide date of prior EEO Activity or the incident you believe to be 
discriminatory; 

- a brief bullet list of each incident you believe to be discriminatory to include  
  - name(s) of the alleged discriminating party; 
  - date(s) of the incident; and  
  - name(s) of any witness to the alleged discrimination; 

- remedies/resolution to resolve your issues.  

Thank you in advance for your response. 

Respectfully, 

Mary Swann, EEO Specialist 
Informal Team Unit 
Office of Equal Rights 
3900 Karina Lane 
Denton, TX 76202 
(940) 891-8573 (ofc) 
(540) 504-2712 (efax) 
mary.swann@fema.dhs.gov 

88

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Monday, August 20, 2018 11:15 AM
Meindl, Max
sick

, close to heading to the emergency room today (Sunday), took nitro pills, condition stabilized, but concerning.  Received 
Blue Cross docs on Saturday so hope to get to a non VA doctor/cardiologist soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

89

 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Friday, August 17, 2018 4:27 PM
Jones, Patricia
Re: Conference Call for IDP's

Per ATS and DTS I was off today and missed the call.  Please advise. 

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Jones, Patricia 
Sent: Friday, August 17, 2018 9:21:18 AM 
To: Boone, William; Atchison, Randy; Bambe, Dayo; Bazemore, Ronetta; Boyko, Brent; Carnes, Lingeria; Clebourn-
McPherson, Toya; Cress, Jack; In, Anthony; Kirk, Denise; Malbrough, Alfred; Meindl, Max; Nash, Julie; Pennisi, Emma; 
Riley Jr, Bernard; Terry, Detra; Walker, Daniel; White, Richard; Wick, Timothy; Wiltse, David 
Subject: Conference Call for IDP's 
When: Friday, August 17, 2018 10:00 AM-11:00 AM. 
Where: 1-800-320-4330 PIN 654321#  

Conference Call for IDP’s  
1-800-320-4330 
PIN 654321# 

90

 
  
Meindl, Max

Subject:
Location:

Start:
End:
Show Time As:

Conference Call for IDP's
1-800-320-4330   PIN 654321#

Fri 8/17/2018 10:00 AM
Fri 8/17/2018 11:00 AM
Tentative

Recurrence:

(none)

Meeting Status:

Not yet responded

Jones, Patricia
Jones, Patricia; Boone, William; Atchison, Randy; Bambe, Dayo; Bazemore, Ronetta; 
Boyko, Brent; Carnes, Lingeria; Clebourn-McPherson, Toya; Cress, Jack; In, Anthony; Kirk, 
Denise; Malbrough, Alfred; Meindl, Max; Nash, Julie; Pennisi, Emma; Riley Jr, Bernard; 
Terry, Detra; Walker, Daniel; White, Richard; Wick, Timothy; Wiltse, David
McKnight Jr, Thomas

Organizer:
Required Attendees:

Optional Attendees:

Conference Call for IDP’s  
1-800-320-4330 
PIN 654321# 

91

Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:

Subject:
Attachments:

Henri, Foudiya
Thursday, August 16, 2018 9:51 AM
Avery, Darlene; femamax@gmail.com; Meindl, Max
Oke, Nicole; McPhie, Regina; FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation; Oke, Nicole; Goudy, 
Douglas
RE: Complaint
blank FEMA Form 256-0-1.pdf

Just tried calling Mr. Max on 832-293-3671.  You may call contact me at 202-394-4633 Cell for assistance should you 
believe you need a Reasonable Accommodation.  FEMA employees may make a request at any time. 

Attached is the FEMA FORM 256-0-1 that all employees may use to document their request.  The employee completes 
PAGE #1 and signs the bottom.  Employee provides to Supervisor.  If any documentation is provided that contains 
medical it must be password protected.  Documentation only needs to be specific to the request. Please copy FEMA 
Reasonable Accommodation Mailbox when you forward the request. 

For further assistance with a complaint I have copied  the Informal Unit Chief, Ms. Oke and Team Lead, Mr. 
Goudy.  You may contact them directly at 202-212-3535, Hit Option #6.  

Thank  you, 

Foudiya Henri 
EEO Specialist / RA Coordinator 
Office of Equal Rights 
500 C St. SW Washington DC 

: iPhone: 202.394.4633 | : Desk: 202.212.4490 | : 540.504.2068 | e-: foudiya.henri@fema.dhs.gov  |  
e-:  fema-reasonable-acommodation@fema.dhs.gov  Click to request an accommodation 

From: Avery, Darlene [mailto:darlene.avery@hq.dhs.gov]  
Sent: Thursday, August 16, 2018 8:02 AM 
To: femamax@gmail.com; Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Oke, Nicole <nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya 
<Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Complaint 

Max Meindl 

Our HQ’s EEO office has received the attached email regarding disability and alleged discrimination inquiries.  Our office 
do not process complaints or disability items for FEMA employees. 

As a FEMA employee, the process is for you to reach out to the FEMA’s Office of Equal Rights (OER). I am forwarding 
your email to the Reasonable Accommodations Program Manager, Foudiya Henri and the Information Complaints 
Manager/staff, Nicole Oke, Regina McPhie to learn how best they can assist you in processing your requests.  

92

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I encourage you to reach out to them if you have further questions or would like to begin the Informal complaints 
process. 

Regards, 

Darlene Avery, MBA 
Program Manager, Disability/Reasonable Accommodation 
Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov 
202-357-1204 (office) 
202-357-1188 (fax) 

From: femamax@gmail.com <femamax@gmail.com>  
Sent: Wednesday, August 15, 2018 4:27 PM 
To: Avery, Darlene <darlene.avery@hq.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: Complaint 

I am, after a couple of weeks of considerable handwringing and possible/potential blowback considerations, hereby 
submitting the attached complaint, although I am very concerned about retaliation. 
I have been falsely accused, in my opinion, and it appears the parties involved are escalating the issue to the possible 
detriment of my employment. 
I categorically deny the allegations and assertions as put forth. 
I have had a very successful tenure with FEMA since 09/2017 when deployed to the Beaumont East team. 
I was a high producer of “applicant signed projects” and continue to do the same here as demonstrated in the Grants 
Manager Metrics. 
I never had any problem with “communications” until all of the sudden I can’t seem to do anything correct in my current 
deployment here in Houston. 
I am dismayed with the process and attitude of the parties, the guilty until proven innocent prevailing mindset is 
inherently unfair. 
A sit-with summary by TK Shadowens before my meeting with the DPAG could best described as “Fiction” because we 
never discussed the items in his summary report and I advised he and DPAG of the same. 
Show me a specific example of the alleged “communication” or “body language” issue.   
I have been falsely accused and convicted without any consideration for my perspective or statements to clarify. 
I am submitting this to you as HR in confidence and would like to request a contact to the EEO group so I can file with 
them also because I feel this issue revolves around my disability and needs to be addressed. 
I would also request a contact to ADR so I can pursue that avenue as well. 
Please contact me with any questions, guidance, advice if required. 
Please advise soonest. 

Thank you in advance. 
Max Meindl 
832-293-3671 

FEMA PDMG 
Houston PA 
202-374-9426 

93

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:
Attachments:

Max Meindl 

Avery, Darlene <darlene.avery@hq.dhs.gov>
Thursday, August 16, 2018 7:02 AM
femamax@gmail.com; Meindl, Max
Oke, Nicole; McPhie, Regina; Henri, Foudiya
RE: Complaint
FW: Complaint

Our HQ’s EEO office has received the attached email regarding disability and alleged discrimination inquiries.  Our office 
do not process complaints or disability items for FEMA employees. 

As a FEMA employee, the process is for you to reach out to the FEMA’s Office of Equal Rights (OER). I am forwarding 
your email to the Reasonable Accommodations Program Manager, Foudiya Henri and the Information Complaints 
Manager/staff, Nicole Oke, Regina McPhie to learn how best they can assist you in processing your requests.  

I encourage you to reach out to them if you have further questions or would like to begin the Informal complaints 
process. 

Regards, 

Darlene Avery, MBA 
Program Manager, Disability/Reasonable Accommodation 
Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov 
202-357-1204 (office) 
202-357-1188 (fax) 

From: femamax@gmail.com <femamax@gmail.com>  
Sent: Wednesday, August 15, 2018 4:27 PM 
To: Avery, Darlene <darlene.avery@hq.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: Complaint 

I am, after a couple of weeks of considerable handwringing and possible/potential blowback considerations, hereby 
submitting the attached complaint, although I am very concerned about retaliation. 
I have been falsely accused, in my opinion, and it appears the parties involved are escalating the issue to the possible 
detriment of my employment. 
I categorically deny the allegations and assertions as put forth. 
I have had a very successful tenure with FEMA since 09/2017 when deployed to the Beaumont East team. 
I was a high producer of “applicant signed projects” and continue to do the same here as demonstrated in the Grants 
Manager Metrics. 
I never had any problem with “communications” until all of the sudden I can’t seem to do anything correct in my current 
deployment here in Houston. 
I am dismayed with the process and attitude of the parties, the guilty until proven innocent prevailing mindset is 
inherently unfair. 
A sit-with summary by TK Shadowens before my meeting with the DPAG could best described as “Fiction” because we 
never discussed the items in his summary report and I advised he and DPAG of the same. 
Show me a specific example of the alleged “communication” or “body language” issue.   
I have been falsely accused and convicted without any consideration for my perspective or statements to clarify. 

94

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I am submitting this to you as HR in confidence and would like to request a contact to the EEO group so I can file with 
them also because I feel this issue revolves around my disability and needs to be addressed. 
I would also request a contact to ADR so I can pursue that avenue as well. 
Please contact me with any questions, guidance, advice if required. 
Please advise soonest. 

Thank you in advance. 
Max Meindl 
832-293-3671 

FEMA PDMG 
Houston PA 
202-374-9426 

95

 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Going to VA clinic  

Get Outlook for iOS 

Meindl, Max
Thursday, August 16, 2018 7:06 AM
Terry, Detra
Sick day 

96

 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Get Outlook for iOS 

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, August 15, 2018 4:49 PM
femamax@gmail.com
Fwd: Sit With 7/27/2018 with PDM Max Meindl

From: Harrison, Jade 
Sent: Friday, August 3, 2018 2:12:55 PM 
To: Meindl, Max; Shadowens, Timothy 
Subject: Re: Sit With 7/27/2018 with PDM Max Meindl  

Max, 

This is a recap of the sit-with you had with Kirk this week. All of which led up to the sit-with.  

Jade Harrison 
Deputy Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
DR-4333 Harvey 
504-908-5357 
Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov 

From: "Meindl, Max" <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Date: Friday, August 3, 2018 at 9:11:46 AM 
To: "Shadowens, Timothy" <timothy.k.shadowens@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: "Harrison, Jade" <Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Sit With 7/27/2018 with PDM Max Meindl 

I respectfully disagree with elements of this summary. 
It is inaccurate and states as fact, elements not in evidence. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 

97

 
  
 
 
 
 
  
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Shadowens, Timothy  
Sent: Thursday, August 2, 2018 7:10 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Harrison, Jade <Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Sit With 7/27/2018 with PDM Max Meindl 

Sit With 7/27/2018 with PDM Max Meindl: Regarding City of Bellaire project #26570 the Evergreen Traffic Signal 
Cabinets & Controls PDM Mr. Meindl was asked by leadership not to send this project back to the CRC. As this project 
once was sent to the CRC, and the CRC sent it back to the field office for a review of eligibility. This project is in question 
of does the possible reimbursement fall under FHWA or FEMA. This was a transition of projects from TFL Berti and PDM 
Plunkett. The expectation was for Mr. Meindl to work and to collaborate with his teammates during this transition 
period.  

Mr. Meindl researched the eligibility reviewing the PAPPG, FHWA (TFL Berti and PDM Plunkett provided this as well), 
and involved the State counterparts. Mr. Meindl felt after his research that the project was eligible and advanced it back 
to the CRC. The CRC immediately called back to the field office confused why this project was sent back to them.  

Current Status: This project was sent to the LRO for a policy determination/policy inquiry. I did call CRC TFL Andrew 
Makardetsh at the CRC since the project is still active in the CRC. Mr. Makardetsh stated that this project as came back 
and forth from the field office. Mr. Makardetsh stated they (CRC) have forwarded this to the TRO for a Determination 
Memo submission. I stated to Mr. Makardetsh that I felt it is best to keep the current status this way, but I will notify my 
DPAG for her final decision.  

o   In addition, I also attended in person the Weekly Meeting with the PDM and the Applicant. The Applicant 
stated they would appreciate it if we obtain an official review from the FEMA policy team and draft a 
determination memo.  

TFL Kirk Shadowens Sit With - Actions to Mr. Meindl: 

       The expectation was for Mr. Meindl was to follow instructions and guidance from all leadership. TFL and other 
leaders expressed to Mr. Meindl several times the situation of the projects and what next steps to take. Mr. 
Meindl did not execute to this, as Mr. Meindl chose to do what he felt the next process step was to do. As Mr. 
Meindl should have not advanced this project to the CRC, until his TFL granted him permission. The expectation 
moving forward is for Mr. Meindl to notify and involve is TFL or leadership before advancing projects to the CRC. 
       The expectation was for Mr. Meindl to work and to collaborate with his teammates during this transition period. 
Mr. Meindl was communicated from TFL Berti and I that he was expected to work in a team effort with the PDM 
Plunkett. The team effort was requested to Mr. Meindl so that he could gain full status of the transition projects. 
Mr. Meindl during this timeframe displayed poor interaction with staff, communication with staff, and displayed 
poor interaction with his peers and leaders. The expectation moving forward is for Mr. Meindl to work with all 
teammates and leadership. Mr. Meindl needs to involve all teammates when asked, and allow those teammates 
to help assist him with their updated project status, so that the execution of project completion is established by 
an efficient manner.  

Regards,  

Kirk Shadowens 
FEMA Task Force Leader  
Harris County Branch DR-4332-TX 
Timothy.K.Shadowens@FEMA.DHS.Gov 
202-802-3384 mobile 

98

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
99

  
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, August 15, 2018 3:01 PM
femamax@gmail.com
Fwd: Not On My Watch (Part 2): Employee Resources
FactSheet_Harassment_ Employees.pdf; FactSheet_Harassment_ Supervisors and 
Managers.pdf

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Meindl, Max 
Sent: Thursday, August 2, 2018 1:11:23 PM 
To: femamax@gmail.com 
Subject: Fwd: Not On My Watch (Part 2): Employee Resources  

From: "Office of the Administrator" <officeoftheadministrator@fema.dhs.gov> 
Date: Wednesday, August 1, 2018 at 2:55:08 PM 
To: "FEMA-ALL" <FEMA-ALL@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Not On My Watch (Part 2): Employee Resources 

FEMA Team, 

I would like to reiterate that ensuring FEMA maintains a safe work environment is extremely important to me 
and to my leadership team. As stated in my previous message, you should know that FEMA has a zero-
tolerance policy for all types of harassment. If you feel you have been harassed or if you witness inappropriate 
behavior by anyone against a fellow employee, I am asking you to report it. I am attaching two documents that 
provide information on where you can do so. 

I recognize that you may find it difficult to make allegations about discrimination or harassment of any type. 
You may feel concerned that you are at risk and worry about how filing a complaint may impact your career. I 
want to assure you that any employee can file a complaint without fear of reprisal because I have a zero-
tolerance policy against retaliation. 

Sexual harassment isn’t limited to just making inappropriate advances. It also includes any unwelcome verbal or 
physical behavior that creates a hostile work environment whether it occurs inside or outside the workplace or 
through social media platforms. No one should be subjected to any such behavior by anyone you may come into 
contact with as part of your job, including managers, co-workers, contractors or Agency partners.  

When allegations of this type are brought to the Agency’s attention, I can assure you that they will be 
investigated promptly, and upon conclusion, appropriate action will be taken. As mentioned in Monday’s 
message, my leadership team is establishing an Office of Professional Responsibility to ensure expeditious, fair, 
and objective follow-up and resolution of allegations of misconduct.   

100

 
  
 
 
The attached documents will answer questions about the steps to report harassment claims.  There is also useful 
information on reporting an incident to the Anti-Harassment Unit.  Counseling services and health and wellness 
advisors are available to all FEMA employees who may not have received the support they needed in the past. 

As I’ve said before, everyone in this Agency is responsible for creating a culture of trust, mutual respect, and 
dignity in our treatment of employees and for all of those we serve. I will accept nothing less.   

It’s important to note that the few individuals participating in this behavior by no means define the majority of 
the honorable, well-intentioned, and well-qualified employees who give this Agency their best every day. I want 
you to know I appreciate your efforts and I will always support and defend you. 

101

  
  
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Thank you, Jade. 

Slie, Brian
Wednesday, August 15, 2018 2:35 PM
Harrison, Jade; Meindl, Max; Terry, Detra
RE: M. Meindl Sit-with

Brian C. Slie 
Deputy Infrastructure Branch Director  
DR 4332 TX JFO Austin 
Region 6 Infrastructure Branch 
DHS/FEMA 
940.368.9270 Cell 
Brian.slie@fema.dhs.gov 

-----Original Appointment----- 
From: Harrison, Jade  
Sent: Wednesday, August 15, 2018 2:19 PM 
To: Meindl, Max; Terry, Detra; Slie, Brian 
Subject: Canceled: M. Meindl Sit-with 
When: Wednesday, August 15, 2018 2:00 PM-2:30 PM (UTC-06:00) Central Time (US & Canada). 
Where: Houston office- Rm 225, conference call number provided 
Importance: High 

Brian, 

You can use the below number to conference in tomorrow. 

Conference Call number: 
1-800-320-4330 

PIN: 892515 

102

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, August 15, 2018 2:30 PM
femamax@gmail.com
Fwd: Branch II 205a and 207 8-13-18
FEMA-4332-DR-TX Branch II 205A 08-13-2018.pdf; FEMA-4332-DR-TX- Branch II 207 
08132018.pdf

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Jiles, Adeaner 
Sent: Tuesday, August 14, 2018 8:06:08 AM 
To: FEMA-4332-DR-TX-Branch-II-All-Hands 
Subject: Branch II 205a and 207 8-13-18  

Good morning all, 

See attached for final 205a and 207 for Branch II as of 8-13-18. 

Best, 
Liam R Bassford 
Planning Specialist (PLSP) 
Branch II Office 
Texas Hurricane Harvey 
FEMA-4332-DR-TX 
(202) 465-0432 
liam.bassford.2@fema.dhs.gov 
Click here to enter the Virtual Situation Room 

To be removed from this all-hands list, please press Ctrl and click here. 

103

 
  
  
  
  
  
Meindl, Max

Subject:
Location:

Start:
End:
Show Time As:

Canceled: M. Meindl Sit-with
Houston office- Rm 225, conference call number provided

Wed 8/15/2018 2:00 PM
Wed 8/15/2018 2:30 PM
Free

Recurrence:

(none)

Meeting Status:

Not yet responded

Organizer:
Required Attendees:

Harrison, Jade
Meindl, Max; Terry, Detra; Slie, Brian

Importance:

High

Brian, 

You can use the below number to conference in tomorrow. 

Conference Call number: 
1-800-320-4330 

PIN: 892515 

104

 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, August 15, 2018 1:58 PM
femamax@gmail.com
Fwd: IDPs
FEMA Form 255-0-1 IDP.PDF

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Jones, Patricia 
Sent: Wednesday, August 15, 2018 12:16:45 PM 
To: Meindl, Max 
Subject: IDPs  

Good Afternoon Max, 

I will be having a call on Thursday or Friday to discuss performance plans and IDPs (Individual Development Plan).  I have 
attached an example IDP for your use.  You will need to complete the IDP and return to me ASAP but no later than noon 
tomorrow 8/16.   You will need to sign and date the form as well. 

A meeting invite with conference pin will be sent out via email. 

Regards, 
Trisha 

PatriciaJones ‘ Trisha’ 
PA Operation Support Crew Leader 
DR-4332-TX 
202-706-2160 FEMA 

Patricia.jones1@fema.dhs.gov 

If nothing ever changed there’d be no Butterflies… 
With honor and integrity, we will safeguard the American people, our homeland, and our values. 

105

 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:

Subject:

Good Afternoon, 

Jones, Patricia
Wednesday, August 15, 2018 1:40 PM
Atchison, Randy; Bambe, Dayo; Bazemore, Ronetta; Boyko, Brent; Carnes, Lingeria; 
Clebourn-McPherson, Toya; Cress, Jack; In, Anthony; Kirk, Denise; Malbrough, Alfred; 
Meindl, Max; Nash, Julie; Pennisi, Emma; Riley Jr, Bernard; Terry, Detra; Teston, Sheree; 
Walker, Daniel; White, Richard; Wick, Timothy; Wiltse, David
IDPs

To answer some of the questions about the Form sent out, Bill wants you to fill out the top information and then list one 
or more training sessions you may be interested in.  
Do not worry about the cost, etc.   

Scan and email them back to me please.  

Many Thanks, 
Trisha  

PatriciaJones ‘ Trisha’ 
PA Operation Support Crew Leader 
DR-4332-TX 
202-706-2160 FEMA 

Patricia.jones1@fema.dhs.gov 

If nothing ever changed there’d be no Butterflies… 
With honor and integrity, we will safeguard the American people, our homeland, and our values. 

106

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Good Afternoon Max, 

Jones, Patricia
Wednesday, August 15, 2018 12:17 PM
Meindl, Max
IDPs
FEMA Form 255-0-1 IDP.PDF

I will be having a call on Thursday or Friday to discuss performance plans and IDPs (Individual Development Plan).  I have 
attached an example IDP for your use.  You will need to complete the IDP and return to me ASAP but no later than noon 
tomorrow 8/16.   You will need to sign and date the form as well. 

A meeting invite with conference pin will be sent out via email. 

Regards, 
Trisha 

PatriciaJones ‘ Trisha’ 
PA Operation Support Crew Leader 
DR-4332-TX 
202-706-2160 FEMA 

Patricia.jones1@fema.dhs.gov 

If nothing ever changed there’d be no Butterflies… 
With honor and integrity, we will safeguard the American people, our homeland, and our values. 

107

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Hi Brian, 

Harrison, Jade
Wednesday, August 15, 2018 11:20 AM
Terry, Detra; Slie, Brian; Meindl, Max
Boone, William
RE: M. Meindl Sit-with

Should I move forward and reschedule the sit-with for tomorrow? and if so, please advise when you are 
available. 

Jade Harrison 
Deputy Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
FEMA- Public Assistance 
DR-4332-TX  
Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov 
(504) 908-5357 (Mobile) 

_____________________________________________ 
From: Terry, Detra  
Sent: Wednesday, August 15, 2018 9:30 AM 
To: Slie, Brian <Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov>; Harrison, Jade <Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov>; Meindl, Max 
<max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Boone, William <William.Boone@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: M. Meindl Sit-with 

Yes, he informed me this morning. 

Thanks, 
Detra 
202.718.0109|iFEMA cell 
detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov 

_____________________________________________ 
From: Slie, Brian  
Sent: Wednesday, August 15, 2018 9:28 AM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov>; Harrison, Jade <Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov>; Meindl, Max 
<max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Boone, William <William.Boone@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: M. Meindl Sit-with 

Good Morning Detra, 

108

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Thank you for the visibility.  Did Mr. Meindl request a sick day after he was informed that there would be a sit-with today? 

Thank you, 

Brian 

Brian C. Slie 
Deputy Infrastructure Branch Director  
DR 4332 TX JFO Austin 
Region 6 Infrastructure Branch 
DHS/FEMA 
940.368.9270 Cell 
Brian.slie@fema.dhs.gov 

_____________________________________________ 
From: Terry, Detra  
Sent: Wednesday, August 15, 2018 8:35 AM 
To: Harrison, Jade <Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov>; Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: M. Meindl Sit-with 

Good Morning, 

Mr. Meindl will not be able attend today’s sit-with as he has taken a sick day (8/15/2018).  Meeting will be rescheduled 
at a later date. 

Thanks, 
Detra 
202.718.0109|iFEMA cell 
detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov 

-----Original Appointment----- 
From: Harrison, Jade  
Sent: Tuesday, August 14, 2018 6:38 PM 
To: Meindl, Max; Terry, Detra; Slie, Brian 
Subject: M. Meindl Sit-with 
When: Wednesday, August 15, 2018 2:00 PM-2:30 PM (UTC-06:00) Central Time (US & Canada). 
Where: Houston office- Rm 225, conference call number provided 

Brian, 

You can use the below number to conference in tomorrow. 

Conference Call number: 
1-800-320-4330 

PIN: 892515 

109

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Terry, Detra
Wednesday, August 15, 2018 9:30 AM
Slie, Brian; Harrison, Jade; Meindl, Max
Boone, William
RE: M. Meindl Sit-with

Yes, he informed me this morning. 

Thanks, 
Detra 
202.718.0109|iFEMA cell 
detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov 

_____________________________________________ 
From: Slie, Brian  
Sent: Wednesday, August 15, 2018 9:28 AM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov>; Harrison, Jade <Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov>; Meindl, Max 
<max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Boone, William <William.Boone@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: M. Meindl Sit-with 

Good Morning Detra, 

Thank you for the visibility.  Did Mr. Meindl request a sick day after he was informed that there would be a sit-with today? 

Thank you, 

Brian 

Brian C. Slie 
Deputy Infrastructure Branch Director  
DR 4332 TX JFO Austin 
Region 6 Infrastructure Branch 
DHS/FEMA 
940.368.9270 Cell 
Brian.slie@fema.dhs.gov 

_____________________________________________ 
From: Terry, Detra  
Sent: Wednesday, August 15, 2018 8:35 AM 
To: Harrison, Jade <Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov>; Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: M. Meindl Sit-with 

110

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Good Morning, 

Mr. Meindl will not be able attend today’s sit-with as he has taken a sick day (8/15/2018).  Meeting will be rescheduled 
at a later date. 

Thanks, 
Detra 
202.718.0109|iFEMA cell 
detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov 

-----Original Appointment----- 
From: Harrison, Jade  
Sent: Tuesday, August 14, 2018 6:38 PM 
To: Meindl, Max; Terry, Detra; Slie, Brian 
Subject: M. Meindl Sit-with 
When: Wednesday, August 15, 2018 2:00 PM-2:30 PM (UTC-06:00) Central Time (US & Canada). 
Where: Houston office- Rm 225, conference call number provided 

Brian, 

You can use the below number to conference in tomorrow. 

Conference Call number: 
1-800-320-4330 

PIN: 892515 

111

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Good Morning Detra, 

Slie, Brian
Wednesday, August 15, 2018 9:28 AM
Terry, Detra; Harrison, Jade; Meindl, Max
Boone, William
RE: M. Meindl Sit-with

Thank you for the visibility.  Did Mr. Meindl request a sick day after he was informed that there would be a sit-with today? 

Thank you, 

Brian 

Brian C. Slie 
Deputy Infrastructure Branch Director  
DR 4332 TX JFO Austin 
Region 6 Infrastructure Branch 
DHS/FEMA 
940.368.9270 Cell 
Brian.slie@fema.dhs.gov 

_____________________________________________ 
From: Terry, Detra  
Sent: Wednesday, August 15, 2018 8:35 AM 
To: Harrison, Jade <Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov>; Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: M. Meindl Sit-with 

Good Morning, 

Mr. Meindl will not be able attend today’s sit-with as he has taken a sick day (8/15/2018).  Meeting will be rescheduled 
at a later date. 

Thanks, 
Detra 
202.718.0109|iFEMA cell 
detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov 

-----Original Appointment----- 
From: Harrison, Jade  
Sent: Tuesday, August 14, 2018 6:38 PM 
To: Meindl, Max; Terry, Detra; Slie, Brian 
Subject: M. Meindl Sit-with 

112

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
When: Wednesday, August 15, 2018 2:00 PM-2:30 PM (UTC-06:00) Central Time (US & Canada). 
Where: Houston office- Rm 225, conference call number provided 

Brian, 

You can use the below number to conference in tomorrow. 

Conference Call number: 
1-800-320-4330 

PIN: 892515 

113

 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Good Morning, 

Terry, Detra
Wednesday, August 15, 2018 8:35 AM
Harrison, Jade; Meindl, Max; Slie, Brian
RE: M. Meindl Sit-with

Mr. Meindl will not be able attend today’s sit-with as he has taken a sick day (8/15/2018).  Meeting will be rescheduled 
at a later date. 

Thanks, 
Detra 
202.718.0109|iFEMA cell 
detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov 

-----Original Appointment----- 
From: Harrison, Jade  
Sent: Tuesday, August 14, 2018 6:38 PM 
To: Meindl, Max; Terry, Detra; Slie, Brian 
Subject: M. Meindl Sit-with 
When: Wednesday, August 15, 2018 2:00 PM-2:30 PM (UTC-06:00) Central Time (US & Canada). 
Where: Houston office- Rm 225, conference call number provided 

Brian, 

You can use the below number to conference in tomorrow. 

Conference Call number: 
1-800-320-4330 

PIN: 892515 

114

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Not well, sick day  

Get Outlook for iOS 

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, August 15, 2018 7:57 AM
Terry, Detra
Sick day

115

 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Sounds great  

Get Outlook for iOS 

Meindl, Max
Thursday, August 9, 2018 7:31 AM
Harrison, Jade
Re: Freeway Manor Baptist Church

From: Harrison, Jade 
Sent: Wednesday, August 8, 2018 6:34:25 PM 
To: Meindl, Max 
Subject: RE: Freeway Manor Baptist Church  

Max, 

Thank you for the offer. I’ll be catching up on some stuff before I leave next week. However, maybe next week 
we can get together for a group lunch. Thank so much! 

Jade Harrison 
Deputy Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
FEMA- Public Assistance 
DR-4332-TX  
Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov 
(504) 908-5357 (Mobile) 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, August 8, 2018 5:56 PM 
To: Harrison, Jade <Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Re: Freeway Manor Baptist Church 

Jade, if you’re available tomorrow for lunch I’d like to treat you to lunch before you demob. Marcus, Mary 
Margaret and possibly Detra are going to Churascos for lunch. Just over 249, South American cuisine, my way 
of saying thanks. 

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Meindl, Max 
Sent: Wednesday, August 8, 2018 5:25:43 PM 
To: Harrison, Jade 
Subject: Re: Freeway Manor Baptist Church  

I can’t seem to withdraw because it’s “pending late damage submission review “. Can you send it back 
somehow? 

Get Outlook for iOS 

116

 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
From: Harrison, Jade 
Sent: Wednesday, August 8, 2018 2:35:51 PM 
To: Meindl, Max 
Subject: RE: Freeway Manor Baptist Church  

Ok. Please remove the late submission in the Grants Manger today. 

Jade Harrison 
Deputy Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
FEMA- Public Assistance 
DR-4332-TX  
Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov 
(504) 908-5357 (Mobile) 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, August 8, 2018 2:15 PM 
To: Harrison, Jade <Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Re: Freeway Manor Baptist Church 

JH, applicant just clarified that the building I identified as the classrooms on google earth I sent to you is what 
they call the warehouse so no need for adding new DI, appreciate your assistance and attentiveness.  The 
existing DI should capture everything. 

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Meindl, Max 
Sent: Wednesday, August 8, 2018 2:07:23 PM 
To: Harrison, Jade 
Subject: Re: Freeway Manor Baptist Church  

I’m not sure how it was missed but I’ll find out 

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Harrison, Jade 
Sent: Wednesday, August 8, 2018 1:51:49 PM 
To: Meindl, Max 
Subject: RE: Freeway Manor Baptist Church  

Max, 

What is the Applicant’s reason for not submitting the building within the 60 day DI deadline? 

Jade Harrison 
Deputy Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
FEMA- Public Assistance 
DR-4332-TX  
Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov 
(504) 908-5357 (Mobile) 

117

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, August 8, 2018 8:54 AM 
To: Harrison, Jade <Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Freeway Manor Baptist Church 

FYI 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Harrison, Jade  
Sent: Tuesday, August 7, 2018 6:27 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Freeway Manor Baptist Church 

Max, 

I reviewed the late submission for the Applicant and it’s for the School, Classroom building/wing which is 
located at the address 2300 Rodney. This address is the same location as the two other line items submitted 
118

  
 
  
  
  
  
  
under this Applicant. Instead of creating a new line item, I think its best to expand the damage line items 
currently under the profile. 

In addition, you may also consider expanding the one damage line item to consolidate the damages for both of 
the current line for the church and warehouse.  

Please review. We can discuss further on tomorrow.  

Jade Harrison 
Deputy Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
FEMA- Public Assistance 
DR-4332-TX  
Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov 
(504) 908-5357 (Mobile) 

119

  
  
  
  
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, August 8, 2018 5:56 PM
Harrison, Jade
Re: Freeway Manor Baptist Church

Jade, if you’re available tomorrow for lunch I’d like to treat you to lunch before you demob. Marcus, Mary Margaret and 
possibly Detra are going to Churascos for lunch. Just over 249, South American cuisine, my way of saying thanks. 

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Meindl, Max 
Sent: Wednesday, August 8, 2018 5:25:43 PM 
To: Harrison, Jade 
Subject: Re: Freeway Manor Baptist Church  

I can’t seem to withdraw because it’s “pending late damage submission review “. Can you send it back somehow? 

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Harrison, Jade 
Sent: Wednesday, August 8, 2018 2:35:51 PM 
To: Meindl, Max 
Subject: RE: Freeway Manor Baptist Church  

Ok. Please remove the late submission in the Grants Manger today. 

Jade Harrison 
Deputy Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
FEMA- Public Assistance 
DR-4332-TX  
Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov 
(504) 908-5357 (Mobile) 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, August 8, 2018 2:15 PM 
To: Harrison, Jade <Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Re: Freeway Manor Baptist Church 

JH, applicant just clarified that the building I identified as the classrooms on google earth I sent to you is what 
they call the warehouse so no need for adding new DI, appreciate your assistance and attentiveness.  The 
existing DI should capture everything. 

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Meindl, Max 
Sent: Wednesday, August 8, 2018 2:07:23 PM 

120

 
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
To: Harrison, Jade 
Subject: Re: Freeway Manor Baptist Church  

I’m not sure how it was missed but I’ll find out 

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Harrison, Jade 
Sent: Wednesday, August 8, 2018 1:51:49 PM 
To: Meindl, Max 
Subject: RE: Freeway Manor Baptist Church  

Max, 

What is the Applicant’s reason for not submitting the building within the 60 day DI deadline? 

Jade Harrison 
Deputy Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
FEMA- Public Assistance 
DR-4332-TX  
Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov 
(504) 908-5357 (Mobile) 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, August 8, 2018 8:54 AM 
To: Harrison, Jade <Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Freeway Manor Baptist Church 

FYI 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 

121

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Harrison, Jade  
Sent: Tuesday, August 7, 2018 6:27 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Freeway Manor Baptist Church 

Max, 

I reviewed the late submission for the Applicant and it’s for the School, Classroom building/wing which is 
located at the address 2300 Rodney. This address is the same location as the two other line items submitted 
under this Applicant. Instead of creating a new line item, I think its best to expand the damage line items 
currently under the profile. 

In addition, you may also consider expanding the one damage line item to consolidate the damages for both of 
the current line for the church and warehouse.  

Please review. We can discuss further on tomorrow.  

Jade Harrison 
Deputy Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
FEMA- Public Assistance 
DR-4332-TX  
Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov 
(504) 908-5357 (Mobile) 

122

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, August 8, 2018 5:26 PM
Harrison, Jade
Re: Freeway Manor Baptist Church

I can’t seem to withdraw because it’s “pending late damage submission review “. Can you send it back somehow? 

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Harrison, Jade 
Sent: Wednesday, August 8, 2018 2:35:51 PM 
To: Meindl, Max 
Subject: RE: Freeway Manor Baptist Church  

Ok. Please remove the late submission in the Grants Manger today. 

Jade Harrison 
Deputy Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
FEMA- Public Assistance 
DR-4332-TX  
Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov 
(504) 908-5357 (Mobile) 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, August 8, 2018 2:15 PM 
To: Harrison, Jade <Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Re: Freeway Manor Baptist Church 

JH, applicant just clarified that the building I identified as the classrooms on google earth I sent to you is what 
they call the warehouse so no need for adding new DI, appreciate your assistance and attentiveness.  The 
existing DI should capture everything. 

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Meindl, Max 
Sent: Wednesday, August 8, 2018 2:07:23 PM 
To: Harrison, Jade 
Subject: Re: Freeway Manor Baptist Church  

I’m not sure how it was missed but I’ll find out 

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Harrison, Jade 
Sent: Wednesday, August 8, 2018 1:51:49 PM 
To: Meindl, Max 
Subject: RE: Freeway Manor Baptist Church  

123

 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Max, 

What is the Applicant’s reason for not submitting the building within the 60 day DI deadline? 

Jade Harrison 
Deputy Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
FEMA- Public Assistance 
DR-4332-TX  
Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov 
(504) 908-5357 (Mobile) 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, August 8, 2018 8:54 AM 
To: Harrison, Jade <Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Freeway Manor Baptist Church 

FYI 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 

124

  
  
  
  
  
 
  
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Harrison, Jade  
Sent: Tuesday, August 7, 2018 6:27 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Freeway Manor Baptist Church 

Max, 

I reviewed the late submission for the Applicant and it’s for the School, Classroom building/wing which is 
located at the address 2300 Rodney. This address is the same location as the two other line items submitted 
under this Applicant. Instead of creating a new line item, I think its best to expand the damage line items 
currently under the profile. 

In addition, you may also consider expanding the one damage line item to consolidate the damages for both of 
the current line for the church and warehouse.  

Please review. We can discuss further on tomorrow.  

Jade Harrison 
Deputy Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
FEMA- Public Assistance 
DR-4332-TX  
Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov 
(504) 908-5357 (Mobile) 

125

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, August 8, 2018 2:07 PM
Harrison, Jade
Re: Freeway Manor Baptist Church

I’m not sure how it was missed but I’ll find out 

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Harrison, Jade 
Sent: Wednesday, August 8, 2018 1:51:49 PM 
To: Meindl, Max 
Subject: RE: Freeway Manor Baptist Church  

Max, 

What is the Applicant’s reason for not submitting the building within the 60 day DI deadline? 

Jade Harrison 
Deputy Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
FEMA- Public Assistance 
DR-4332-TX  
Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov 
(504) 908-5357 (Mobile) 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, August 8, 2018 8:54 AM 
To: Harrison, Jade <Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Freeway Manor Baptist Church 

FYI 

126

 
  
  
  
  
  
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Harrison, Jade  
Sent: Tuesday, August 7, 2018 6:27 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Freeway Manor Baptist Church 

Max, 

I reviewed the late submission for the Applicant and it’s for the School, Classroom building/wing which is 
located at the address 2300 Rodney. This address is the same location as the two other line items submitted 
under this Applicant. Instead of creating a new line item, I think its best to expand the damage line items 
currently under the profile. 

In addition, you may also consider expanding the one damage line item to consolidate the damages for both of 
the current line for the church and warehouse.  

127

 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Please review. We can discuss further on tomorrow.  

Jade Harrison 
Deputy Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
FEMA- Public Assistance 
DR-4332-TX  
Jade.Harrison@fema.dhs.gov 
(504) 908-5357 (Mobile) 

128

  
  
  
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Thursday, August 2, 2018 1:11 PM
femamax@gmail.com
Fwd: Not On My Watch (Part 2): Employee Resources
FactSheet_Harassment_ Employees.pdf; FactSheet_Harassment_ Supervisors and 
Managers.pdf

From: "Office of the Administrator" <officeoftheadministrator@fema.dhs.gov> 
Date: Wednesday, August 1, 2018 at 2:55:08 PM 
To: "FEMA-ALL" <FEMA-ALL@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Not On My Watch (Part 2): Employee Resources 

FEMA Team, 

I would like to reiterate that ensuring FEMA maintains a safe work environment is extremely important to me 
and to my leadership team. As stated in my previous message, you should know that FEMA has a zero-
tolerance policy for all types of harassment. If you feel you have been harassed or if you witness inappropriate 
behavior by anyone against a fellow employee, I am asking you to report it. I am attaching two documents that 
provide information on where you can do so. 

I recognize that you may find it difficult to make allegations about discrimination or harassment of any type. 
You may feel concerned that you are at risk and worry about how filing a complaint may impact your career. I 
want to assure you that any employee can file a complaint without fear of reprisal because I have a zero-
tolerance policy against retaliation. 

Sexual harassment isn’t limited to just making inappropriate advances. It also includes any unwelcome verbal or 
physical behavior that creates a hostile work environment whether it occurs inside or outside the workplace or 
through social media platforms. No one should be subjected to any such behavior by anyone you may come into 
contact with as part of your job, including managers, co-workers, contractors or Agency partners.  

When allegations of this type are brought to the Agency’s attention, I can assure you that they will be 
investigated promptly, and upon conclusion, appropriate action will be taken. As mentioned in Monday’s 
message, my leadership team is establishing an Office of Professional Responsibility to ensure expeditious, fair, 
and objective follow-up and resolution of allegations of misconduct.   

The attached documents will answer questions about the steps to report harassment claims.  There is also useful 
information on reporting an incident to the Anti-Harassment Unit.  Counseling services and health and wellness 
advisors are available to all FEMA employees who may not have received the support they needed in the past. 

As I’ve said before, everyone in this Agency is responsible for creating a culture of trust, mutual respect, and 
dignity in our treatment of employees and for all of those we serve. I will accept nothing less.   

129

 
 
It’s important to note that the few individuals participating in this behavior by no means define the majority of 
the honorable, well-intentioned, and well-qualified employees who give this Agency their best every day. I want 
you to know I appreciate your efforts and I will always support and defend you. 

130

  
  
femamax@gmail.com

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>
Wednesday, March 6, 2019 2:03 PM
Oke, Nicole
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

I had to submit my FMLA paperwork today, to cover all the bases, to deal with the RA nonactivity, again a penalty option, 
considering it is a no pay option. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Oke, Nicole  
Sent: Wednesday, March 6, 2019 1:48 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Mr. Meindl, 

I am in training today.  Let’s talk tomorrow.  Did you request fulltime telework?   

Thanks, 

Nicole  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, March 6, 2019 2:45 PM 
To: Oke, Nicole <nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: femamax@gmail.com 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Nicole, 
Why is the RA process so ignored/abused by the process? 
I’ve done everything required on my end yet the “institution” can’t seem to take the request seriously nor process the 
request pursuant to DHS/FEMA policy. 

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This seems unjust, unfair and unreasonable to an individual requesting/requiring a timely response to a request. 
Instead of a reasonable accommodation, so I can be allowed to do a couple of hours of telework before driving 60 miles 
to the office, I am required to take “leave without pay” on a regular basis resulting in a diminished paycheck.   
All in all, it seems as if the default position of DHS/FEMA is to stall and/or decline any request, for whatever reason. 
I would expect or request that the process, mine specifically, be looked in to, and to identify process disconnects and put 
eyes on a way to improve the process, especially the timeliness requirements or lack thereof 
According to policy: 
FEMA Manual 1430.1 Chg.1 December 3, 2002 
4-4 
Chapter 5 
Time Frames 
5-1. Processing Requests. FEMA will process requests for reasonable accommodation and provide accommodations, where they are 
appropriate, in as short a time frame as reasonably possible. FEMA recognizes, however, that the time necessary to process a request 
will depend on the nature of the accommodation requested and whether it is necessary to obtain supporting information. Time frames 
for processing requests and providing reasonable accommodation where no supporting information is required are as follows: 
a. Requests from applicants for employment should be expedited when necessary to ensure the applicant’s ability to compete for the 
position. However, these requests should not exceed ten (10) business days. 
b. If a request from an employee is processed by the supervisor, the request should be processed, and the accommodation, if granted, 
provided within 15 business days from the date of receipt of the request. Requests for accommodation should be expedited when the 
accommodation is needed to enable the employee to participate in an Agency activity scheduled to occur in the near future. 
(1) If the decision maker believes that it is necessary to obtain medical information to determine whether the requesting individual has 
a disability and/or to identify the functional limitations, the decision maker will request the information as soon as possible after his or 
her receipt of the request for accommodation. FEMA recognizes that the need for documentation may not become apparent until after 
the interactive process has begun. 
(2) In cases where medical documentation is needed, the accommodation, if granted, will be provided within ten (10) business days for 
an applicant, and within 15 business days for an employee, from the date the decision maker receives the relevant information, absent 
any extenuating circumstances. 
c. Where the Disability Program Manager is the decision maker on a request for reasonable accommodation, he/she will make a 
decision on the request and the  accommodation, if granted, will be provided within 15 business days from the date of the request. If 
medical documentation is necessary, the decision will be made within 15 business days of receipt of the medical information, absent 
any extenuating circumstances. 

We are going on 132 business days since AUGUST 23rd 2018 and 196 calendar days. 
Unreasonable and unnecessary. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Oke, Nicole  
Sent: Monday, March 4, 2019 5:57 AM 

2

 
 
 
 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Dear Mr. Meindl, 

I apologize for the delay.  You should have a response by close of business this week. 

Respectfully, 

Nicole  

Nicole Oke 
Informal Unit Chief, Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/Federal Emergency Management Agency 
500 C Street, SW  Room 4SW-0915 
Washington, DC 20472-3505 
Cell: 202.717.1595 
E-mail: nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING:  This document and attachments are for official use only.  It is to be controlled, stored, handled, 
transmitted, distributed and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) 
information.  This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee without prior authorization of the 
originator.  This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this 
information may result in personal liability with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the 
intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise use the information. Please reply 
immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, February 27, 2019 5:00 PM 
To: Oke, Nicole <nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Johnson, Jo 
Linda <jolinda.johnson@fema.dhs.gov>; Peterkin, Donna <donna.peterkin@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene 
<Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov>; rick@guerradays.com; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Nicole, 
As of this date I’ve yet to receive an answer to my RA request filed in August of 2018.   
I am at a loss trying to understand how FEMA/DHS policy can be so blatantly ignored/violated in such a casual manner by 
so many. 
My request was based on a serious heart condition requiring a bit of flexibility in my morning schedule to accommodate 
issues I face daily.   

3

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
My heart surgery, which was scheduled for 01/25/2019, had to be postponed/rescheduled for a different time, but I am 
hoping it will be soon.   
My simple request to FEMA/DHS was for some understanding and flexibility to assist me over the past 6 months, in a 
challenging time, and the FEMA team, thus far, has deemed me insignificant and not worthy of a response nor 
consideration of assistance. 
Can you explain this? 

NOTE: Equal Rights Office policy requires the agency to provide requested Reasonable Accommodation within 10 days, 
barring extenuating circumstances. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Oke, Nicole  
Sent: Tuesday, February 12, 2019 2:22 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>; Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Johnson, 
Jo Linda <jolinda.johnson@fema.dhs.gov>; Peterkin, Donna <donna.peterkin@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene 
<Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Dear Mr. Meindl, 

I will research the matter and circle back with a response and next steps.   

Respectfully, 

Nicole  

Nicole Oke 
Informal Unit Chief, Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/Federal Emergency Management Agency 
500 C Street, SW  Room 4SW-0915 
Washington, DC 20472-3505 
Cell: 202.717.1595 
E-mail: nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov 

4

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
WARNING:  This document and attachments are for official use only.  It is to be controlled, stored, handled, 
transmitted, distributed and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) 
information.  This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee without prior authorization of the 
originator.  This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this 
information may result in personal liability with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the 
intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise use the information. Please reply 
immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, February 12, 2019 2:49 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Johnson, Jo Linda <jolinda.johnson@fema.dhs.gov>; 
Peterkin, Donna <donna.peterkin@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas <Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya 
<Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
Feb 12th 2019 
On or about August 27th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one 
has seen it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly SIX (6) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative 
Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-
3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if 
you have any questions, please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward 
and address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

5

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 4:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; 
Slie, Brian <Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene 
<Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one 
has seen it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative 
Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-
3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if 
you have any questions, please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward 
and address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

6

 
 
 
 
  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

7

 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

See attached 

Meindl, Max
Thursday, August 23, 2018 1:08 PM
Terry, Detra
RA
Reasonable Accomodation-FEMA Form 256-0-1-08232018.pdf

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

1

 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:

Subject:
Attachments:

Detra, 
RA form attached. 

Meindl, Max
Thursday, August 23, 2018 1:11 PM
Terry, Detra
Oke, Nicole; McPhie, Regina; FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation; Goudy, Douglas; Henri, Foudiya; Avery, Darlene; 
femamax@gmail.com
RA
Reasonable Accomodation-FEMA Form 256-0-1-08232018.pdf

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

2

 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:
Attachments:

Max: 

FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation
Thursday, August 23, 2018 9:22 PM
Meindl, Max
FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation; Maddox Britt, Sandra
RE: RA
RA INFORMATION SHEET-empl.doc

The Office of Equal Rights/Reasonable Accommodation Unit has received your reasonable accommodation (RA) 
request.  The case has been assigned to Sandra Maddox Britt, Reasonable Accommodation Analyst.  Please fill out the 
attached information sheet to complete your file and send to her.  Ms. Maddox-Britt will contact you soon to facilitate 
the RA process.  If you have any questions, Ms. Maddox-Britt will assist.  I have omitted the other individuals you 
copied in the e-mail.  The RA process is a confidential one and only individuals with the need to know should be 
involved. 

Respectfully, 

Luz A. Fernandez 
Equal Rights Specialist | AEP/RA Lead | DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0915, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | 
Desk: 202.212.2740 | Mobile: 202.805.8638 | Efax: 540.504.2816 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official 
Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered 
by Federal and state laws governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability with 
civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise use the information. Please reply immediately to the 
sender and delete this message.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 2:11 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Oke, Nicole <nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; FEMA-Reasonable-
Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas <Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, 
Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; femamax@gmail.com 
Subject: RA 

Detra, 
RA form attached. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

3

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

4

 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:

Subject:

FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation
Thursday, August 23, 2018 9:26 PM
Meindl, Max; Terry, Detra
Oke, Nicole; McPhie, Regina; FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation; Goudy, Douglas; Henri, Foudiya; Avery, Darlene; 
femamax@gmail.com
RE: RA

Case assigned to Sandra Maddox-Britt. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 2:11 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Oke, Nicole <nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; FEMA-Reasonable-
Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas <Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, 
Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; femamax@gmail.com 
Subject: RA 

Detra, 
RA form attached. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

5

 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Henri, Foudiya
Tuesday, August 28, 2018 11:28 AM
Meindl, Max
Goudy, Douglas
Max Meindl request for Reasonable Accommodation

Importance:

High

Hello Max, 
What is the name of your Supervisor please?_____________.  Was the RA request sent to the Supervisor? If yes please let me 
know.  I can assist with the RA request ONLY. 

For Informal Complaint assistance please contact Doug Goudy directly.   

Thank you, 
Foudiya Henri 
202-394-4633 Cell 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 2:11 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Oke, Nicole <nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; FEMA-Reasonable-
Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas <Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, 
Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; femamax@gmail.com 
Subject: RA 

Detra, 
RA form attached. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

6

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Maddox Britt, Sandra
Wednesday, August 29, 2018 9:31 AM
Meindl, Max
RE: RA Request (Meindl)
FEMA Form 256-0-1.pdf

Hello Mr. Meindl 
I have received an email from Ms. Fernandez indicating that you have an RA request.  The document attached to the email, 
however, is blank.  Can you please send me the form you completed?   

Also, who is your Supervisor of Record, and did you provide the form to your supervisor of Record?   

Thank you 
Sandra Britt 
202-412-4787 

From: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 10:22 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra 
<sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA 

Max: 

The Office of Equal Rights/Reasonable Accommodation Unit has received your reasonable accommodation (RA) 
request.  The case has been assigned to Sandra Maddox Britt, Reasonable Accommodation Analyst.  Please fill out the 
attached information sheet to complete your file and send to her.  Ms. Maddox-Britt will contact you soon to facilitate 
the RA process.  If you have any questions, Ms. Maddox-Britt will assist.  I have omitted the other individuals you 
copied in the e-mail.  The RA process is a confidential one and only individuals with the need to know should be 
involved. 

Respectfully, 

Luz A. Fernandez 
Equal Rights Specialist | AEP/RA Lead | DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0915, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | 
Desk: 202.212.2740 | Mobile: 202.805.8638 | Efax: 540.504.2816 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official 
Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered 
by Federal and state laws governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability with 
civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise use the information. Please reply immediately to the 
sender and delete this message.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 2:11 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Oke, Nicole <nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; FEMA-Reasonable-
Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas <Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, 
Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; femamax@gmail.com 
Subject: RA 

Detra, 

7

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RA form attached. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

8

 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, August 29, 2018 9:38 AM
Maddox Britt, Sandra
RE: RA Request (Meindl)
Reasonable Accomodation-FEMA Form 256-0-1-08232018.pdf

Yes, I provided it to my supervisor. 
My chain of command as I understand it: 
Detra Terry, Task Force Lead 
Detra S. Terry 
Public Assistance-PDM/DIS 
DR-4332-TX 
202.718.0109|iFEMA cell 
detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov 

  Albert P. Walters III 
Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
Disaster 4332 – Harvey 
Cell Phone 504-570-4412 
Albert.Walters@FEMA.DHS.GOV 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Maddox Britt, Sandra  
Sent: Wednesday, August 29, 2018 9:31 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request (Meindl) 

Hello Mr. Meindl 
I have received an email from Ms. Fernandez indicating that you have an RA request.  The document attached to the email, 
however, is blank.  Can you please send me the form you completed?   

Also, who is your Supervisor of Record, and did you provide the form to your supervisor of Record?   

Thank you 
Sandra Britt 
202-412-4787 

9

             
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 10:22 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra 
<sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA 

Max: 

The Office of Equal Rights/Reasonable Accommodation Unit has received your reasonable accommodation (RA) 
request.  The case has been assigned to Sandra Maddox Britt, Reasonable Accommodation Analyst.  Please fill out the 
attached information sheet to complete your file and send to her.  Ms. Maddox-Britt will contact you soon to facilitate 
the RA process.  If you have any questions, Ms. Maddox-Britt will assist.  I have omitted the other individuals you 
copied in the e-mail.  The RA process is a confidential one and only individuals with the need to know should be 
involved. 

Respectfully, 

Luz A. Fernandez 
Equal Rights Specialist | AEP/RA Lead | DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0915, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | 
Desk: 202.212.2740 | Mobile: 202.805.8638 | Efax: 540.504.2816 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official 
Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered 
by Federal and state laws governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability with 
civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise use the information. Please reply immediately to the 
sender and delete this message.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 2:11 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Oke, Nicole <nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; FEMA-Reasonable-
Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas <Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, 
Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; femamax@gmail.com 
Subject: RA 

Detra, 
RA form attached. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

10

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11

 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Who is your supervisor? 

Maddox Britt, Sandra
Thursday, September 6, 2018 4:35 PM
Meindl, Max
RE: RA Request (Meindl)

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, August 29, 2018 10:38 AM 
To: Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request (Meindl) 

Yes, I provided it to my supervisor. 
My chain of command as I understand it: 
Detra Terry, Task Force Lead 
Detra S. Terry 
Public Assistance-PDM/DIS 
DR-4332-TX 
202.718.0109|iFEMA cell 
detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov 

  Albert P. Walters III 
Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
Disaster 4332 – Harvey 
Cell Phone 504-570-4412 
Albert.Walters@FEMA.DHS.GOV 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Maddox Britt, Sandra  
Sent: Wednesday, August 29, 2018 9:31 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request (Meindl) 

Hello Mr. Meindl 
I have received an email from Ms. Fernandez indicating that you have an RA request.  The document attached to the email, 
however, is blank.  Can you please send me the form you completed?   

12

 
 
             
 
 
 
 
 
Also, who is your Supervisor of Record, and did you provide the form to your supervisor of Record?   

Thank you 
Sandra Britt 
202-412-4787 

From: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 10:22 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra 
<sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA 

Max: 

The Office of Equal Rights/Reasonable Accommodation Unit has received your reasonable accommodation (RA) 
request.  The case has been assigned to Sandra Maddox Britt, Reasonable Accommodation Analyst.  Please fill out the 
attached information sheet to complete your file and send to her.  Ms. Maddox-Britt will contact you soon to facilitate 
the RA process.  If you have any questions, Ms. Maddox-Britt will assist.  I have omitted the other individuals you 
copied in the e-mail.  The RA process is a confidential one and only individuals with the need to know should be 
involved. 

Respectfully, 

Luz A. Fernandez 
Equal Rights Specialist | AEP/RA Lead | DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0915, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | 
Desk: 202.212.2740 | Mobile: 202.805.8638 | Efax: 540.504.2816 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official 
Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered 
by Federal and state laws governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability with 
civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise use the information. Please reply immediately to the 
sender and delete this message.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 2:11 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Oke, Nicole <nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; FEMA-Reasonable-
Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas <Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, 
Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; femamax@gmail.com 
Subject: RA 

Detra, 
RA form attached. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

13

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

14

 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Maddox Britt, Sandra
Thursday, September 6, 2018 4:37 PM
Meindl, Max
RE: RA Request (Meindl)

Never mind, I thought the name below was your signature block.  So you are in PA at HQ?  If so, I need to refer you to PA’s RA 
POCs. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, August 29, 2018 10:38 AM 
To: Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request (Meindl) 

Yes, I provided it to my supervisor. 
My chain of command as I understand it: 
Detra Terry, Task Force Lead 
Detra S. Terry 
Public Assistance-PDM/DIS 
DR-4332-TX 
202.718.0109|iFEMA cell 
detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov 

  Albert P. Walters III 
Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
Disaster 4332 – Harvey 
Cell Phone 504-570-4412 
Albert.Walters@FEMA.DHS.GOV 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Maddox Britt, Sandra  
Sent: Wednesday, August 29, 2018 9:31 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request (Meindl) 

Hello Mr. Meindl 

15

 
 
             
 
 
 
 
 
I have received an email from Ms. Fernandez indicating that you have an RA request.  The document attached to the email, 
however, is blank.  Can you please send me the form you completed?   

Also, who is your Supervisor of Record, and did you provide the form to your supervisor of Record?   

Thank you 
Sandra Britt 
202-412-4787 

From: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 10:22 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra 
<sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA 

Max: 

The Office of Equal Rights/Reasonable Accommodation Unit has received your reasonable accommodation (RA) 
request.  The case has been assigned to Sandra Maddox Britt, Reasonable Accommodation Analyst.  Please fill out the 
attached information sheet to complete your file and send to her.  Ms. Maddox-Britt will contact you soon to facilitate 
the RA process.  If you have any questions, Ms. Maddox-Britt will assist.  I have omitted the other individuals you 
copied in the e-mail.  The RA process is a confidential one and only individuals with the need to know should be 
involved. 

Respectfully, 

Luz A. Fernandez 
Equal Rights Specialist | AEP/RA Lead | DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0915, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | 
Desk: 202.212.2740 | Mobile: 202.805.8638 | Efax: 540.504.2816 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official 
Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered 
by Federal and state laws governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability with 
civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise use the information. Please reply immediately to the 
sender and delete this message.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 2:11 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Oke, Nicole <nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; FEMA-Reasonable-
Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas <Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, 
Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; femamax@gmail.com 
Subject: RA 

Detra, 
RA form attached. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

16

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

17

 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Thursday, September 6, 2018 4:39 PM
Maddox Britt, Sandra
Re: RA Request (Meindl)

Houston Recovery Office, PA 

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Maddox Britt, Sandra 
Sent: Thursday, September 6, 2018 4:36:49 PM 
To: Meindl, Max 
Subject: RE: RA Request (Meindl)  

Never mind, I thought the name below was your signature block.  So you are in PA at HQ?  If so, I need to refer you to PA’s RA 
POCs. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, August 29, 2018 10:38 AM 
To: Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request (Meindl) 

Yes, I provided it to my supervisor. 
My chain of command as I understand it: 
Detra Terry, Task Force Lead 
Detra S. Terry 
Public Assistance-PDM/DIS 
DR-4332-TX 
202.718.0109|iFEMA cell 
detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov 

  Albert P. Walters III 
Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
Disaster 4332 – Harvey 
Cell Phone 504-570-4412 
Albert.Walters@FEMA.DHS.GOV 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

18

 
  
  
  
             
  
  
  
From: Maddox Britt, Sandra  
Sent: Wednesday, August 29, 2018 9:31 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request (Meindl) 

Hello Mr. Meindl 
I have received an email from Ms. Fernandez indicating that you have an RA request.  The document attached to the email, 
however, is blank.  Can you please send me the form you completed?   

Also, who is your Supervisor of Record, and did you provide the form to your supervisor of Record?   

Thank you 
Sandra Britt 
202-412-4787 

From: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 10:22 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra 
<sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA 

Max: 

The Office of Equal Rights/Reasonable Accommodation Unit has received your reasonable accommodation (RA) 
request.  The case has been assigned to Sandra Maddox Britt, Reasonable Accommodation Analyst.  Please fill out the 
attached information sheet to complete your file and send to her.  Ms. Maddox-Britt will contact you soon to facilitate 
the RA process.  If you have any questions, Ms. Maddox-Britt will assist.  I have omitted the other individuals you 
copied in the e-mail.  The RA process is a confidential one and only individuals with the need to know should be 
involved. 

Respectfully, 

Luz A. Fernandez 
Equal Rights Specialist | AEP/RA Lead | DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0915, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | 
Desk: 202.212.2740 | Mobile: 202.805.8638 | Efax: 540.504.2816 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official 
Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered 
by Federal and state laws governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability with 
civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise use the information. Please reply immediately to the 
sender and delete this message.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 2:11 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Oke, Nicole <nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; FEMA-Reasonable-
Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas <Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, 
Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; femamax@gmail.com 
Subject: RA 

Detra, 
RA form attached. 

19

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

20

  
  
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Maddox Britt, Sandra
Thursday, September 6, 2018 4:52 PM
Meindl, Max
RE: RA Request (Meindl)

Please forward your medical documentation to me. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, August 29, 2018 10:38 AM 
To: Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request (Meindl) 

Yes, I provided it to my supervisor. 
My chain of command as I understand it: 
Detra Terry, Task Force Lead 
Detra S. Terry 
Public Assistance-PDM/DIS 
DR-4332-TX 
202.718.0109|iFEMA cell 
detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov 

  Albert P. Walters III 
Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
Disaster 4332 – Harvey 
Cell Phone 504-570-4412 
Albert.Walters@FEMA.DHS.GOV 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Maddox Britt, Sandra  
Sent: Wednesday, August 29, 2018 9:31 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request (Meindl) 

Hello Mr. Meindl 
I have received an email from Ms. Fernandez indicating that you have an RA request.  The document attached to the email, 
however, is blank.  Can you please send me the form you completed?   

21

 
 
             
 
 
 
 
 
Also, who is your Supervisor of Record, and did you provide the form to your supervisor of Record?   

Thank you 
Sandra Britt 
202-412-4787 

From: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 10:22 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra 
<sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA 

Max: 

The Office of Equal Rights/Reasonable Accommodation Unit has received your reasonable accommodation (RA) 
request.  The case has been assigned to Sandra Maddox Britt, Reasonable Accommodation Analyst.  Please fill out the 
attached information sheet to complete your file and send to her.  Ms. Maddox-Britt will contact you soon to facilitate 
the RA process.  If you have any questions, Ms. Maddox-Britt will assist.  I have omitted the other individuals you 
copied in the e-mail.  The RA process is a confidential one and only individuals with the need to know should be 
involved. 

Respectfully, 

Luz A. Fernandez 
Equal Rights Specialist | AEP/RA Lead | DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0915, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | 
Desk: 202.212.2740 | Mobile: 202.805.8638 | Efax: 540.504.2816 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official 
Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered 
by Federal and state laws governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability with 
civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise use the information. Please reply immediately to the 
sender and delete this message.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 2:11 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Oke, Nicole <nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; FEMA-Reasonable-
Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas <Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, 
Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; femamax@gmail.com 
Subject: RA 

Detra, 
RA form attached. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

22

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

23

 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Thursday, September 6, 2018 5:08 PM
Maddox Britt, Sandra
Re: RA Request (Meindl)

Sent from personal email in confidence  

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Maddox Britt, Sandra 
Sent: Thursday, September 6, 2018 4:51:43 PM 
To: Meindl, Max 
Subject: RE: RA Request (Meindl)  

Please forward your medical documentation to me. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, August 29, 2018 10:38 AM 
To: Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request (Meindl) 

Yes, I provided it to my supervisor. 
My chain of command as I understand it: 
Detra Terry, Task Force Lead 
Detra S. Terry 
Public Assistance-PDM/DIS 
DR-4332-TX 
202.718.0109|iFEMA cell 
detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov 

  Albert P. Walters III 
Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
Disaster 4332 – Harvey 
Cell Phone 504-570-4412 
Albert.Walters@FEMA.DHS.GOV 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

24

 
  
  
  
             
  
  
  
  
From: Maddox Britt, Sandra  
Sent: Wednesday, August 29, 2018 9:31 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request (Meindl) 

Hello Mr. Meindl 
I have received an email from Ms. Fernandez indicating that you have an RA request.  The document attached to the email, 
however, is blank.  Can you please send me the form you completed?   

Also, who is your Supervisor of Record, and did you provide the form to your supervisor of Record?   

Thank you 
Sandra Britt 
202-412-4787 

From: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 10:22 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra 
<sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA 

Max: 

The Office of Equal Rights/Reasonable Accommodation Unit has received your reasonable accommodation (RA) 
request.  The case has been assigned to Sandra Maddox Britt, Reasonable Accommodation Analyst.  Please fill out the 
attached information sheet to complete your file and send to her.  Ms. Maddox-Britt will contact you soon to facilitate 
the RA process.  If you have any questions, Ms. Maddox-Britt will assist.  I have omitted the other individuals you 
copied in the e-mail.  The RA process is a confidential one and only individuals with the need to know should be 
involved. 

Respectfully, 

Luz A. Fernandez 
Equal Rights Specialist | AEP/RA Lead | DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0915, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | 
Desk: 202.212.2740 | Mobile: 202.805.8638 | Efax: 540.504.2816 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official 
Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered 
by Federal and state laws governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability with 
civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise use the information. Please reply immediately to the 
sender and delete this message.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 2:11 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Oke, Nicole <nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; FEMA-Reasonable-
Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas <Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, 
Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; femamax@gmail.com 
Subject: RA 

Detra, 
RA form attached. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 

25

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

26

  
  
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Merritt, Lisa
Monday, September 17, 2018 2:11 PM
Meindl, Max
Reasonable Accommodation Request

Importance:

High

Hello Max, 

I have received your 256 Reasonable Accommodation Request Form. In addition, we will need supporting 
documentation from your health care provider (on letterhead) to provide to Office of Equal Rights. Below is 
the information that should be included in the letter for a reasonable accommodation request: 

  The nature, severity, or duration of your impairment/disability 
  The extent to which the impairment/disability limits your ability to perform your job 
  Why you require the particular Reasonable Accommodation (what tools do you need to do your job 

i.e. chair, vehicle upgrade / please be very specific) 

  How the accommodation you requested will assist you in performing the essential functions of the job 

Please give me a call, so we can discuss. 

Thank you, 

Cadre Management Team 
Public Assistance Division 
Field Support Branch 
FEMA/HQ 
Reservists Line: 202-212-1028 
FEMA-PA-Reservist-Program@fema.dhs.gov 

27

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Hello Max, 

Merritt, Lisa
Thursday, October 4, 2018 1:12 PM
Meindl, Max
RE: Reasonable Accommodation Request

I reached out last week and left another voicemail. Do you have any questions about the RA process? Anything we need to go 
over together? 

Thank you, 

Lisa Merritt|Asst. Reservist Program Manager 
Public Assistance Division 
Field Support Branch 
FEMA | HQ 
202-212-2524 | lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov  
FEMA-PA-Reservist-Program@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Merritt, Lisa  
Sent: Wednesday, September 26, 2018 1:29 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation Request 

Hello Max, 

I wanted to follow up on your reasonable accommodation. Please give me a call, so I can answer any questions you may have. 

Thank you, 

Lisa Merritt|Asst. Reservist Program Manager 
Public Assistance Division 
Field Support Branch 
FEMA | HQ 
202-212-2524 | lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov  
FEMA-PA-Reservist-Program@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Merritt, Lisa  
Sent: Monday, September 17, 2018 3:11 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation Request 
Importance: High 

Hello Max, 

28

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I have received your 256 Reasonable Accommodation Request Form. In addition, we will need supporting 
documentation from your health care provider (on letterhead) to provide to Office of Equal Rights. Below is 
the information that should be included in the letter for a reasonable accommodation request: 

  The nature, severity, or duration of your impairment/disability 
  The extent to which the impairment/disability limits your ability to perform your job 
  Why you require the particular Reasonable Accommodation (what tools do you need to do your job 

i.e. chair, vehicle upgrade / please be very specific) 

  How the accommodation you requested will assist you in performing the essential functions of the job 

Please give me a call, so we can discuss. 

Thank you, 

Cadre Management Team 
Public Assistance Division 
Field Support Branch 
FEMA/HQ 
Reservists Line: 202-212-1028 
FEMA-PA-Reservist-Program@fema.dhs.gov 

29

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Thursday, October 4, 2018 1:16 PM
Merritt, Lisa
RE: Reasonable Accommodation Request

I have to meet with a cardiologist to obtain requested paperwork. 
The VA does not seem to be interested in putting anything in writing so I am having to see a provider outside the VA system. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Merritt, Lisa  
Sent: Thursday, October 4, 2018 1:12 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation Request 

Hello Max, 

I reached out last week and left another voicemail. Do you have any questions about the RA process? Anything we need to go 
over together? 

Thank you, 

Lisa Merritt|Asst. Reservist Program Manager 
Public Assistance Division 
Field Support Branch 
FEMA | HQ 
202-212-2524 | lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov  
FEMA-PA-Reservist-Program@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Merritt, Lisa  
Sent: Wednesday, September 26, 2018 1:29 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation Request 

Hello Max, 

30

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I wanted to follow up on your reasonable accommodation. Please give me a call, so I can answer any questions you may have. 

Thank you, 

Lisa Merritt|Asst. Reservist Program Manager 
Public Assistance Division 
Field Support Branch 
FEMA | HQ 
202-212-2524 | lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov  
FEMA-PA-Reservist-Program@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Merritt, Lisa  
Sent: Monday, September 17, 2018 3:11 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation Request 
Importance: High 

Hello Max, 

I have received your 256 Reasonable Accommodation Request Form. In addition, we will need supporting 
documentation from your health care provider (on letterhead) to provide to Office of Equal Rights. Below is 
the information that should be included in the letter for a reasonable accommodation request: 

  The nature, severity, or duration of your impairment/disability 
  The extent to which the impairment/disability limits your ability to perform your job 
  Why you require the particular Reasonable Accommodation (what tools do you need to do your job 

i.e. chair, vehicle upgrade / please be very specific) 

  How the accommodation you requested will assist you in performing the essential functions of the job 

Please give me a call, so we can discuss. 

Thank you, 

Cadre Management Team 
Public Assistance Division 
Field Support Branch 
FEMA/HQ 
Reservists Line: 202-212-1028 
FEMA-PA-Reservist-Program@fema.dhs.gov 

31

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Merritt, Lisa
Thursday, October 4, 2018 1:23 PM
Meindl, Max
RE: Reasonable Accommodation Request

Ok, I’m just making sure I can answer any questions you may have. The note needs to be very descriptive and provide all 
information that I sent to you in bullet points. 

Thank you, 

Lisa Merritt|Asst. Reservist Program Manager 
Public Assistance Division 
Field Support Branch 
FEMA | HQ 
202-212-2524 | lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov  
FEMA-PA-Reservist-Program@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, October 4, 2018 2:16 PM 
To: Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation Request 

I have to meet with a cardiologist to obtain requested paperwork. 
The VA does not seem to be interested in putting anything in writing so I am having to see a provider outside the VA system. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Merritt, Lisa  
Sent: Thursday, October 4, 2018 1:12 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation Request 

Hello Max, 

32

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I reached out last week and left another voicemail. Do you have any questions about the RA process? Anything we need to go 
over together? 

Thank you, 

Lisa Merritt|Asst. Reservist Program Manager 
Public Assistance Division 
Field Support Branch 
FEMA | HQ 
202-212-2524 | lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov  
FEMA-PA-Reservist-Program@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Merritt, Lisa  
Sent: Wednesday, September 26, 2018 1:29 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation Request 

Hello Max, 

I wanted to follow up on your reasonable accommodation. Please give me a call, so I can answer any questions you may have. 

Thank you, 

Lisa Merritt|Asst. Reservist Program Manager 
Public Assistance Division 
Field Support Branch 
FEMA | HQ 
202-212-2524 | lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov  
FEMA-PA-Reservist-Program@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Merritt, Lisa  
Sent: Monday, September 17, 2018 3:11 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation Request 
Importance: High 

Hello Max, 

I have received your 256 Reasonable Accommodation Request Form. In addition, we will need supporting 
documentation from your health care provider (on letterhead) to provide to Office of Equal Rights. Below is 
the information that should be included in the letter for a reasonable accommodation request: 

  The nature, severity, or duration of your impairment/disability 
  The extent to which the impairment/disability limits your ability to perform your job 
  Why you require the particular Reasonable Accommodation (what tools do you need to do your job 

i.e. chair, vehicle upgrade / please be very specific) 

  How the accommodation you requested will assist you in performing the essential functions of the job 

Please give me a call, so we can discuss. 

33

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Thank you, 

Cadre Management Team 
Public Assistance Division 
Field Support Branch 
FEMA/HQ 
Reservists Line: 202-212-1028 
FEMA-PA-Reservist-Program@fema.dhs.gov 

34

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:
Attachments:

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

Brathwaite, Winston
Monday, October 15, 2018 1:06 PM
Meindl, Max
FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation
RA Request
RA INFORMATION SHEET-Vista.doc; blank FEMA Form 256-0-1.pdf

My name is Winston Brathwaite. I am a Reasonable Accommodation Analyst in the Office of Equal Rights. It has come to my 
attention that you may have recently applied for a reasonable accommodation. If that is the case, I will be the analyst assigned 
to your case. I have attached to this email for your convenience the RA information sheet, and a blank FEMA 256 Form. Once I 
have received these 2 completed forms, I will begin to expeditiously process your request.  

The reasonable accommodation (RA) request process is a confidential one that must not be shared with anyone that does not 
have a need to know.  Besides the supervisor of record (SOR) no other individual should be included or copied in the process, to 
preserve confidentiality.  The RA process starts with the request of the employee for a reasonable accommodation (RA).  The 
request can be done in any way, verbally, email, letter, etc. The SOR should request that the employee fill out a 256-0-1 form 
(Request for Reasonable Accommodation), attached, indicating what they are requesting as an accommodation, the reason for 
the request and if the request is time sensitive.  The employee must sign and date the request.  When an individual requests an 
RA, there should be an interactive process (meeting) between the SOR and the employee to better understand the employee’s 
request and needs.  If the disability is not obvious (visible), the SOR requests the employee to provide medical documentation to 
support the specific need for the RA requested.  Sufficient medical information provides the following information: 

•             Nature, severity and duration of the disability 
•             What major life activity or activities the disability impairs  
•             How the impairment of the major life activity or activities affects the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position  
•             Limitations that the disability imposes on the individual as related to the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position 
•             How the RA requested will assist the employee in the performance of the essential functions of the position  

In FEMA, the supervisor of record (SOR) is the individual that makes the decision of approving, denying or granting an alternate 
RA, after having an interactive discussion with the employee.  OER staff can participate as facilitators, or neutral parties in the 
interactive discussion, if needed.  The RA Analysts in the Office of Equal Rights (OER) RA Unit assist/facilitate the process.  As the 
RA Analyst for this case, I  will provide advice regarding the law, the policy and procedure and can provide assistance with the 
language of the response to the RA, if needed. If you need further assistance, or have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully, 

Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

35

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Monday, October 15, 2018 1:16 PM
Brathwaite, Winston
FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation
RE: RA Request
Reasonable Accomodation-FEMA Form 256-0-1-08232018.pdf

Previously sent to my supervisor as follows: 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 1:08 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA 
See attached 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:06 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA Request 

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

My name is Winston Brathwaite. I am a Reasonable Accommodation Analyst in the Office of Equal Rights. It has come to my 
attention that you may have recently applied for a reasonable accommodation. If that is the case, I will be the analyst assigned 
to your case. I have attached to this email for your convenience the RA information sheet, and a blank FEMA 256 Form. Once I 
have received these 2 completed forms, I will begin to expeditiously process your request.  

The reasonable accommodation (RA) request process is a confidential one that must not be shared with anyone that does not 
have a need to know.  Besides the supervisor of record (SOR) no other individual should be included or copied in the process, to 

36

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
preserve confidentiality.  The RA process starts with the request of the employee for a reasonable accommodation (RA).  The 
request can be done in any way, verbally, email, letter, etc. The SOR should request that the employee fill out a 256-0-1 form 
(Request for Reasonable Accommodation), attached, indicating what they are requesting as an accommodation, the reason for 
the request and if the request is time sensitive.  The employee must sign and date the request.  When an individual requests an 
RA, there should be an interactive process (meeting) between the SOR and the employee to better understand the employee’s 
request and needs.  If the disability is not obvious (visible), the SOR requests the employee to provide medical documentation to 
support the specific need for the RA requested.  Sufficient medical information provides the following information: 

•             Nature, severity and duration of the disability 
•             What major life activity or activities the disability impairs  
•             How the impairment of the major life activity or activities affects the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position  
•             Limitations that the disability imposes on the individual as related to the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position 
•             How the RA requested will assist the employee in the performance of the essential functions of the position  

In FEMA, the supervisor of record (SOR) is the individual that makes the decision of approving, denying or granting an alternate 
RA, after having an interactive discussion with the employee.  OER staff can participate as facilitators, or neutral parties in the 
interactive discussion, if needed.  The RA Analysts in the Office of Equal Rights (OER) RA Unit assist/facilitate the process.  As the 
RA Analyst for this case, I  will provide advice regarding the law, the policy and procedure and can provide assistance with the 
language of the response to the RA, if needed. If you need further assistance, or have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully, 

Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

37

 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Brathwaite, Winston
Monday, October 15, 2018 1:18 PM
Meindl, Max
FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation
RE: RA Request

Thanks for your response, Mr. Meindl. I will follow up with your supervisor.  

Best,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 2:16 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Previously sent to my supervisor as follows: 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 1:08 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA 
See attached 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:06 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA Request 

38

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

My name is Winston Brathwaite. I am a Reasonable Accommodation Analyst in the Office of Equal Rights. It has come to my 
attention that you may have recently applied for a reasonable accommodation. If that is the case, I will be the analyst assigned 
to your case. I have attached to this email for your convenience the RA information sheet, and a blank FEMA 256 Form. Once I 
have received these 2 completed forms, I will begin to expeditiously process your request.  

The reasonable accommodation (RA) request process is a confidential one that must not be shared with anyone that does not 
have a need to know.  Besides the supervisor of record (SOR) no other individual should be included or copied in the process, to 
preserve confidentiality.  The RA process starts with the request of the employee for a reasonable accommodation (RA).  The 
request can be done in any way, verbally, email, letter, etc. The SOR should request that the employee fill out a 256-0-1 form 
(Request for Reasonable Accommodation), attached, indicating what they are requesting as an accommodation, the reason for 
the request and if the request is time sensitive.  The employee must sign and date the request.  When an individual requests an 
RA, there should be an interactive process (meeting) between the SOR and the employee to better understand the employee’s 
request and needs.  If the disability is not obvious (visible), the SOR requests the employee to provide medical documentation to 
support the specific need for the RA requested.  Sufficient medical information provides the following information: 

•             Nature, severity and duration of the disability 
•             What major life activity or activities the disability impairs  
•             How the impairment of the major life activity or activities affects the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position  
•             Limitations that the disability imposes on the individual as related to the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position 
•             How the RA requested will assist the employee in the performance of the essential functions of the position  

In FEMA, the supervisor of record (SOR) is the individual that makes the decision of approving, denying or granting an alternate 
RA, after having an interactive discussion with the employee.  OER staff can participate as facilitators, or neutral parties in the 
interactive discussion, if needed.  The RA Analysts in the Office of Equal Rights (OER) RA Unit assist/facilitate the process.  As the 
RA Analyst for this case, I  will provide advice regarding the law, the policy and procedure and can provide assistance with the 
language of the response to the RA, if needed. If you need further assistance, or have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully, 

Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

39

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:
Attachments:

FYI 

Meindl, Max
Monday, October 15, 2018 2:02 PM
Brathwaite, Winston
FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation
RE: RA Request
RA INFORMATION SHEET-Vista-Meindl.doc; RA information.pdf; Reasonable Accomodation-FEMA Form 256-0-1-08232018.pdf

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:18 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Thanks for your response, Mr. Meindl. I will follow up with your supervisor.  

Best,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 2:16 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Previously sent to my supervisor as follows: 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 1:08 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA 
See attached 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 

40

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:06 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA Request 

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

My name is Winston Brathwaite. I am a Reasonable Accommodation Analyst in the Office of Equal Rights. It has come to my 
attention that you may have recently applied for a reasonable accommodation. If that is the case, I will be the analyst assigned 
to your case. I have attached to this email for your convenience the RA information sheet, and a blank FEMA 256 Form. Once I 
have received these 2 completed forms, I will begin to expeditiously process your request.  

The reasonable accommodation (RA) request process is a confidential one that must not be shared with anyone that does not 
have a need to know.  Besides the supervisor of record (SOR) no other individual should be included or copied in the process, to 
preserve confidentiality.  The RA process starts with the request of the employee for a reasonable accommodation (RA).  The 
request can be done in any way, verbally, email, letter, etc. The SOR should request that the employee fill out a 256-0-1 form 
(Request for Reasonable Accommodation), attached, indicating what they are requesting as an accommodation, the reason for 
the request and if the request is time sensitive.  The employee must sign and date the request.  When an individual requests an 
RA, there should be an interactive process (meeting) between the SOR and the employee to better understand the employee’s 
request and needs.  If the disability is not obvious (visible), the SOR requests the employee to provide medical documentation to 
support the specific need for the RA requested.  Sufficient medical information provides the following information: 

•             Nature, severity and duration of the disability 
•             What major life activity or activities the disability impairs  
•             How the impairment of the major life activity or activities affects the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position  
•             Limitations that the disability imposes on the individual as related to the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position 
•             How the RA requested will assist the employee in the performance of the essential functions of the position  

In FEMA, the supervisor of record (SOR) is the individual that makes the decision of approving, denying or granting an alternate 
RA, after having an interactive discussion with the employee.  OER staff can participate as facilitators, or neutral parties in the 
interactive discussion, if needed.  The RA Analysts in the Office of Equal Rights (OER) RA Unit assist/facilitate the process.  As the 

41

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RA Analyst for this case, I  will provide advice regarding the law, the policy and procedure and can provide assistance with the 
language of the response to the RA, if needed. If you need further assistance, or have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully, 

Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

42

 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Thank you Mr. Meindl.  

Brathwaite, Winston
Monday, October 15, 2018 2:08 PM
Meindl, Max
FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation; Terry, Detra
RE: RA Request

Ms. Terry, there is no need to request that Mr. Meindl complete the information form any longer. Thank you.  

Best,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 3:02 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

FYI 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:18 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Thanks for your response, Mr. Meindl. I will follow up with your supervisor.  

Best,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 2:16 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 

43

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Previously sent to my supervisor as follows: 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 1:08 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA 
See attached 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:06 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA Request 

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

My name is Winston Brathwaite. I am a Reasonable Accommodation Analyst in the Office of Equal Rights. It has come to my 
attention that you may have recently applied for a reasonable accommodation. If that is the case, I will be the analyst assigned 
to your case. I have attached to this email for your convenience the RA information sheet, and a blank FEMA 256 Form. Once I 
have received these 2 completed forms, I will begin to expeditiously process your request.  

The reasonable accommodation (RA) request process is a confidential one that must not be shared with anyone that does not 
have a need to know.  Besides the supervisor of record (SOR) no other individual should be included or copied in the process, to 
preserve confidentiality.  The RA process starts with the request of the employee for a reasonable accommodation (RA).  The 
request can be done in any way, verbally, email, letter, etc. The SOR should request that the employee fill out a 256-0-1 form 
(Request for Reasonable Accommodation), attached, indicating what they are requesting as an accommodation, the reason for 
the request and if the request is time sensitive.  The employee must sign and date the request.  When an individual requests an 
RA, there should be an interactive process (meeting) between the SOR and the employee to better understand the employee’s 

44

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
request and needs.  If the disability is not obvious (visible), the SOR requests the employee to provide medical documentation to 
support the specific need for the RA requested.  Sufficient medical information provides the following information: 

•             Nature, severity and duration of the disability 
•             What major life activity or activities the disability impairs  
•             How the impairment of the major life activity or activities affects the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position  
•             Limitations that the disability imposes on the individual as related to the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position 
•             How the RA requested will assist the employee in the performance of the essential functions of the position  

In FEMA, the supervisor of record (SOR) is the individual that makes the decision of approving, denying or granting an alternate 
RA, after having an interactive discussion with the employee.  OER staff can participate as facilitators, or neutral parties in the 
interactive discussion, if needed.  The RA Analysts in the Office of Equal Rights (OER) RA Unit assist/facilitate the process.  As the 
RA Analyst for this case, I  will provide advice regarding the law, the policy and procedure and can provide assistance with the 
language of the response to the RA, if needed. If you need further assistance, or have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully, 

Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

45

 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Monday, October 15, 2018 2:10 PM
Brathwaite, Winston
FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation; Terry, Detra
RE: RA Request

10-4, thank you Winston, appreciate your efforts. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 2:08 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Terry, Detra 
<detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Thank you Mr. Meindl.  

Ms. Terry, there is no need to request that Mr. Meindl complete the information form any longer. Thank you.  

Best,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 3:02 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

FYI 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 

46

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:18 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Thanks for your response, Mr. Meindl. I will follow up with your supervisor.  

Best,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 2:16 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Previously sent to my supervisor as follows: 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 1:08 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA 
See attached 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

47

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:06 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA Request 

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

My name is Winston Brathwaite. I am a Reasonable Accommodation Analyst in the Office of Equal Rights. It has come to my 
attention that you may have recently applied for a reasonable accommodation. If that is the case, I will be the analyst assigned 
to your case. I have attached to this email for your convenience the RA information sheet, and a blank FEMA 256 Form. Once I 
have received these 2 completed forms, I will begin to expeditiously process your request.  

The reasonable accommodation (RA) request process is a confidential one that must not be shared with anyone that does not 
have a need to know.  Besides the supervisor of record (SOR) no other individual should be included or copied in the process, to 
preserve confidentiality.  The RA process starts with the request of the employee for a reasonable accommodation (RA).  The 
request can be done in any way, verbally, email, letter, etc. The SOR should request that the employee fill out a 256-0-1 form 
(Request for Reasonable Accommodation), attached, indicating what they are requesting as an accommodation, the reason for 
the request and if the request is time sensitive.  The employee must sign and date the request.  When an individual requests an 
RA, there should be an interactive process (meeting) between the SOR and the employee to better understand the employee’s 
request and needs.  If the disability is not obvious (visible), the SOR requests the employee to provide medical documentation to 
support the specific need for the RA requested.  Sufficient medical information provides the following information: 

•             Nature, severity and duration of the disability 
•             What major life activity or activities the disability impairs  
•             How the impairment of the major life activity or activities affects the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position  
•             Limitations that the disability imposes on the individual as related to the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position 
•             How the RA requested will assist the employee in the performance of the essential functions of the position  

In FEMA, the supervisor of record (SOR) is the individual that makes the decision of approving, denying or granting an alternate 
RA, after having an interactive discussion with the employee.  OER staff can participate as facilitators, or neutral parties in the 
interactive discussion, if needed.  The RA Analysts in the Office of Equal Rights (OER) RA Unit assist/facilitate the process.  As the 
RA Analyst for this case, I  will provide advice regarding the law, the policy and procedure and can provide assistance with the 
language of the response to the RA, if needed. If you need further assistance, or have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully, 

Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 

48

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

49

 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Sunday, October 21, 2018 2:43 PM
femamax@gmail.com
Fwd: Reasonable Accommodation Request

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Merritt, Lisa 
Sent: Thursday, October 4, 2018 1:23:25 PM 
To: Meindl, Max 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation Request  

Ok, I’m just making sure I can answer any questions you may have. The note needs to be very descriptive and provide all 
information that I sent to you in bullet points. 

Thank you, 

Lisa Merritt|Asst. Reservist Program Manager 
Public Assistance Division 
Field Support Branch 
FEMA | HQ 
202-212-2524 | lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov  
FEMA-PA-Reservist-Program@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, October 4, 2018 2:16 PM 
To: Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation Request 

I have to meet with a cardiologist to obtain requested paperwork. 
The VA does not seem to be interested in putting anything in writing so I am having to see a provider outside the VA system. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

50

 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
From: Merritt, Lisa  
Sent: Thursday, October 4, 2018 1:12 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation Request 

Hello Max, 

I reached out last week and left another voicemail. Do you have any questions about the RA process? Anything we need to go 
over together? 

Thank you, 

Lisa Merritt|Asst. Reservist Program Manager 
Public Assistance Division 
Field Support Branch 
FEMA | HQ 
202-212-2524 | lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov  
FEMA-PA-Reservist-Program@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Merritt, Lisa  
Sent: Wednesday, September 26, 2018 1:29 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation Request 

Hello Max, 

I wanted to follow up on your reasonable accommodation. Please give me a call, so I can answer any questions you may have. 

Thank you, 

Lisa Merritt|Asst. Reservist Program Manager 
Public Assistance Division 
Field Support Branch 
FEMA | HQ 
202-212-2524 | lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov  
FEMA-PA-Reservist-Program@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Merritt, Lisa  
Sent: Monday, September 17, 2018 3:11 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation Request 
Importance: High 

Hello Max, 

I have received your 256 Reasonable Accommodation Request Form. In addition, we will need supporting 
documentation from your health care provider (on letterhead) to provide to Office of Equal Rights. Below is 
the information that should be included in the letter for a reasonable accommodation request: 

51

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  The nature, severity, or duration of your impairment/disability 
  The extent to which the impairment/disability limits your ability to perform your job 
  Why you require the particular Reasonable Accommodation (what tools do you need to do your job 

i.e. chair, vehicle upgrade / please be very specific) 

  How the accommodation you requested will assist you in performing the essential functions of the job 

Please give me a call, so we can discuss. 

Thank you, 

Cadre Management Team 
Public Assistance Division 
Field Support Branch 
FEMA/HQ 
Reservists Line: 202-212-1028 
FEMA-PA-Reservist-Program@fema.dhs.gov 

52

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, October 24, 2018 10:57 AM
Brathwaite, Winston
RE: RA Request
2018_10_24_10_52_27.pdf; RA information.pdf

Winston, 
Appreciate your correspondence and assistance. 
Documents attached. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:06 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA Request 

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

My name is Winston Brathwaite. I am a Reasonable Accommodation Analyst in the Office of Equal Rights. It has come to my 
attention that you may have recently applied for a reasonable accommodation. If that is the case, I will be the analyst assigned 
to your case. I have attached to this email for your convenience the RA information sheet, and a blank FEMA 256 Form. Once I 
have received these 2 completed forms, I will begin to expeditiously process your request.  

The reasonable accommodation (RA) request process is a confidential one that must not be shared with anyone that does not 
have a need to know.  Besides the supervisor of record (SOR) no other individual should be included or copied in the process, to 
preserve confidentiality.  The RA process starts with the request of the employee for a reasonable accommodation (RA).  The 
request can be done in any way, verbally, email, letter, etc. The SOR should request that the employee fill out a 256-0-1 form 
(Request for Reasonable Accommodation), attached, indicating what they are requesting as an accommodation, the reason for 
the request and if the request is time sensitive.  The employee must sign and date the request.  When an individual requests an 
RA, there should be an interactive process (meeting) between the SOR and the employee to better understand the employee’s 
request and needs.  If the disability is not obvious (visible), the SOR requests the employee to provide medical documentation to 
support the specific need for the RA requested.  Sufficient medical information provides the following information: 

•             Nature, severity and duration of the disability 
•             What major life activity or activities the disability impairs  

53

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•             How the impairment of the major life activity or activities affects the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position  
•             Limitations that the disability imposes on the individual as related to the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position 
•             How the RA requested will assist the employee in the performance of the essential functions of the position  

In FEMA, the supervisor of record (SOR) is the individual that makes the decision of approving, denying or granting an alternate 
RA, after having an interactive discussion with the employee.  OER staff can participate as facilitators, or neutral parties in the 
interactive discussion, if needed.  The RA Analysts in the Office of Equal Rights (OER) RA Unit assist/facilitate the process.  As the 
RA Analyst for this case, I  will provide advice regarding the law, the policy and procedure and can provide assistance with the 
language of the response to the RA, if needed. If you need further assistance, or have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully, 

Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

54

 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:
Attachments:

Thank you, Mr. Meindl: 

Brathwaite, Winston
Wednesday, October 24, 2018 11:13 AM
Meindl, Max
Terry, Detra
RE: RA Request
blank FEMA Form 256-0-1.pdf

Did you fill out the 256 Form as well? I don’t see one for you on file. I have attached it to this email for your convenience. Also, 
for future reference, due to the confidential nature of the RA process, when sending medical documents, please password 
protect them. Once I receive the completed 256 Form, I will begin processing your request. Have a great day.  

Respectfully,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, October 24, 2018 11:57 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Winston, 
Appreciate your correspondence and assistance. 
Documents attached. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:06 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA Request 

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

My name is Winston Brathwaite. I am a Reasonable Accommodation Analyst in the Office of Equal Rights. It has come to my 
attention that you may have recently applied for a reasonable accommodation. If that is the case, I will be the analyst assigned 

55

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to your case. I have attached to this email for your convenience the RA information sheet, and a blank FEMA 256 Form. Once I 
have received these 2 completed forms, I will begin to expeditiously process your request.  

The reasonable accommodation (RA) request process is a confidential one that must not be shared with anyone that does not 
have a need to know.  Besides the supervisor of record (SOR) no other individual should be included or copied in the process, to 
preserve confidentiality.  The RA process starts with the request of the employee for a reasonable accommodation (RA).  The 
request can be done in any way, verbally, email, letter, etc. The SOR should request that the employee fill out a 256-0-1 form 
(Request for Reasonable Accommodation), attached, indicating what they are requesting as an accommodation, the reason for 
the request and if the request is time sensitive.  The employee must sign and date the request.  When an individual requests an 
RA, there should be an interactive process (meeting) between the SOR and the employee to better understand the employee’s 
request and needs.  If the disability is not obvious (visible), the SOR requests the employee to provide medical documentation to 
support the specific need for the RA requested.  Sufficient medical information provides the following information: 

•             Nature, severity and duration of the disability 
•             What major life activity or activities the disability impairs  
•             How the impairment of the major life activity or activities affects the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position  
•             Limitations that the disability imposes on the individual as related to the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position 
•             How the RA requested will assist the employee in the performance of the essential functions of the position  

In FEMA, the supervisor of record (SOR) is the individual that makes the decision of approving, denying or granting an alternate 
RA, after having an interactive discussion with the employee.  OER staff can participate as facilitators, or neutral parties in the 
interactive discussion, if needed.  The RA Analysts in the Office of Equal Rights (OER) RA Unit assist/facilitate the process.  As the 
RA Analyst for this case, I  will provide advice regarding the law, the policy and procedure and can provide assistance with the 
language of the response to the RA, if needed. If you need further assistance, or have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully, 

Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

56

 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Thursday, October 25, 2018 8:43 AM
Brathwaite, Winston
RE: RA Request
Dr. Gay.pdf

It is included as page 2 and 3 of behind the doctors letter (2018-10-24-10-52-27 file), I’ve included it again for you. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Wednesday, October 24, 2018 11:13 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Thank you, Mr. Meindl: 

Did you fill out the 256 Form as well? I don’t see one for you on file. I have attached it to this email for your convenience. Also, 
for future reference, due to the confidential nature of the RA process, when sending medical documents, please password 
protect them. Once I receive the completed 256 Form, I will begin processing your request. Have a great day.  

Respectfully,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, October 24, 2018 11:57 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Winston, 
Appreciate your correspondence and assistance. 
Documents attached. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 

57

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:06 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA Request 

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

My name is Winston Brathwaite. I am a Reasonable Accommodation Analyst in the Office of Equal Rights. It has come to my 
attention that you may have recently applied for a reasonable accommodation. If that is the case, I will be the analyst assigned 
to your case. I have attached to this email for your convenience the RA information sheet, and a blank FEMA 256 Form. Once I 
have received these 2 completed forms, I will begin to expeditiously process your request.  

The reasonable accommodation (RA) request process is a confidential one that must not be shared with anyone that does not 
have a need to know.  Besides the supervisor of record (SOR) no other individual should be included or copied in the process, to 
preserve confidentiality.  The RA process starts with the request of the employee for a reasonable accommodation (RA).  The 
request can be done in any way, verbally, email, letter, etc. The SOR should request that the employee fill out a 256-0-1 form 
(Request for Reasonable Accommodation), attached, indicating what they are requesting as an accommodation, the reason for 
the request and if the request is time sensitive.  The employee must sign and date the request.  When an individual requests an 
RA, there should be an interactive process (meeting) between the SOR and the employee to better understand the employee’s 
request and needs.  If the disability is not obvious (visible), the SOR requests the employee to provide medical documentation to 
support the specific need for the RA requested.  Sufficient medical information provides the following information: 

•             Nature, severity and duration of the disability 
•             What major life activity or activities the disability impairs  
•             How the impairment of the major life activity or activities affects the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position  
•             Limitations that the disability imposes on the individual as related to the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position 
•             How the RA requested will assist the employee in the performance of the essential functions of the position  

In FEMA, the supervisor of record (SOR) is the individual that makes the decision of approving, denying or granting an alternate 
RA, after having an interactive discussion with the employee.  OER staff can participate as facilitators, or neutral parties in the 
interactive discussion, if needed.  The RA Analysts in the Office of Equal Rights (OER) RA Unit assist/facilitate the process.  As the 
RA Analyst for this case, I  will provide advice regarding the law, the policy and procedure and can provide assistance with the 
language of the response to the RA, if needed. If you need further assistance, or have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully, 

Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 

58

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

59

 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Thursday, October 25, 2018 8:44 AM
Brathwaite, Winston
RE: RA Request
Reasonable Accomodation-FEMA Form 256-0-1-08232018-10252018.pdf

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Wednesday, October 24, 2018 11:13 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Thank you, Mr. Meindl: 

Did you fill out the 256 Form as well? I don’t see one for you on file. I have attached it to this email for your convenience. Also, 
for future reference, due to the confidential nature of the RA process, when sending medical documents, please password 
protect them. Once I receive the completed 256 Form, I will begin processing your request. Have a great day.  

Respectfully,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, October 24, 2018 11:57 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Winston, 
Appreciate your correspondence and assistance. 
Documents attached. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 

60

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:06 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA Request 

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

My name is Winston Brathwaite. I am a Reasonable Accommodation Analyst in the Office of Equal Rights. It has come to my 
attention that you may have recently applied for a reasonable accommodation. If that is the case, I will be the analyst assigned 
to your case. I have attached to this email for your convenience the RA information sheet, and a blank FEMA 256 Form. Once I 
have received these 2 completed forms, I will begin to expeditiously process your request.  

The reasonable accommodation (RA) request process is a confidential one that must not be shared with anyone that does not 
have a need to know.  Besides the supervisor of record (SOR) no other individual should be included or copied in the process, to 
preserve confidentiality.  The RA process starts with the request of the employee for a reasonable accommodation (RA).  The 
request can be done in any way, verbally, email, letter, etc. The SOR should request that the employee fill out a 256-0-1 form 
(Request for Reasonable Accommodation), attached, indicating what they are requesting as an accommodation, the reason for 
the request and if the request is time sensitive.  The employee must sign and date the request.  When an individual requests an 
RA, there should be an interactive process (meeting) between the SOR and the employee to better understand the employee’s 
request and needs.  If the disability is not obvious (visible), the SOR requests the employee to provide medical documentation to 
support the specific need for the RA requested.  Sufficient medical information provides the following information: 

•             Nature, severity and duration of the disability 
•             What major life activity or activities the disability impairs  
•             How the impairment of the major life activity or activities affects the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position  
•             Limitations that the disability imposes on the individual as related to the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position 
•             How the RA requested will assist the employee in the performance of the essential functions of the position  

In FEMA, the supervisor of record (SOR) is the individual that makes the decision of approving, denying or granting an alternate 
RA, after having an interactive discussion with the employee.  OER staff can participate as facilitators, or neutral parties in the 
interactive discussion, if needed.  The RA Analysts in the Office of Equal Rights (OER) RA Unit assist/facilitate the process.  As the 
RA Analyst for this case, I  will provide advice regarding the law, the policy and procedure and can provide assistance with the 
language of the response to the RA, if needed. If you need further assistance, or have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully, 

Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 

61

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

62

 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Thursday, October 25, 2018 8:45 AM
Brathwaite, Winston
FW: RA Request
RA INFORMATION SHEET-Vista-Meindl.doc; RA information.pdf; Reasonable Accomodation-FEMA Form 256-0-1-08232018.pdf

I sent this email to you on the 15th . 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 2:02 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

FYI 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:18 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 

63

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Thanks for your response, Mr. Meindl. I will follow up with your supervisor.  

Best,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 2:16 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Previously sent to my supervisor as follows: 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 1:08 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA 
See attached 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:06 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA Request 

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

My name is Winston Brathwaite. I am a Reasonable Accommodation Analyst in the Office of Equal Rights. It has come to my 
attention that you may have recently applied for a reasonable accommodation. If that is the case, I will be the analyst assigned 

64

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to your case. I have attached to this email for your convenience the RA information sheet, and a blank FEMA 256 Form. Once I 
have received these 2 completed forms, I will begin to expeditiously process your request.  

The reasonable accommodation (RA) request process is a confidential one that must not be shared with anyone that does not 
have a need to know.  Besides the supervisor of record (SOR) no other individual should be included or copied in the process, to 
preserve confidentiality.  The RA process starts with the request of the employee for a reasonable accommodation (RA).  The 
request can be done in any way, verbally, email, letter, etc. The SOR should request that the employee fill out a 256-0-1 form 
(Request for Reasonable Accommodation), attached, indicating what they are requesting as an accommodation, the reason for 
the request and if the request is time sensitive.  The employee must sign and date the request.  When an individual requests an 
RA, there should be an interactive process (meeting) between the SOR and the employee to better understand the employee’s 
request and needs.  If the disability is not obvious (visible), the SOR requests the employee to provide medical documentation to 
support the specific need for the RA requested.  Sufficient medical information provides the following information: 

•             Nature, severity and duration of the disability 
•             What major life activity or activities the disability impairs  
•             How the impairment of the major life activity or activities affects the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position  
•             Limitations that the disability imposes on the individual as related to the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position 
•             How the RA requested will assist the employee in the performance of the essential functions of the position  

In FEMA, the supervisor of record (SOR) is the individual that makes the decision of approving, denying or granting an alternate 
RA, after having an interactive discussion with the employee.  OER staff can participate as facilitators, or neutral parties in the 
interactive discussion, if needed.  The RA Analysts in the Office of Equal Rights (OER) RA Unit assist/facilitate the process.  As the 
RA Analyst for this case, I  will provide advice regarding the law, the policy and procedure and can provide assistance with the 
language of the response to the RA, if needed. If you need further assistance, or have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully, 

Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

65

 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Thursday, October 25, 2018 9:28 AM
Brathwaite, Winston
RE: RA Request

Winston, 
Forgot to thank you for your efforts. 
Have a wonderful day…. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Wednesday, October 24, 2018 11:13 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Thank you, Mr. Meindl: 

Did you fill out the 256 Form as well? I don’t see one for you on file. I have attached it to this email for your convenience. Also, 
for future reference, due to the confidential nature of the RA process, when sending medical documents, please password 
protect them. Once I receive the completed 256 Form, I will begin processing your request. Have a great day.  

Respectfully,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, October 24, 2018 11:57 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Winston, 
Appreciate your correspondence and assistance. 
Documents attached. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 

66

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:06 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA Request 

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

My name is Winston Brathwaite. I am a Reasonable Accommodation Analyst in the Office of Equal Rights. It has come to my 
attention that you may have recently applied for a reasonable accommodation. If that is the case, I will be the analyst assigned 
to your case. I have attached to this email for your convenience the RA information sheet, and a blank FEMA 256 Form. Once I 
have received these 2 completed forms, I will begin to expeditiously process your request.  

The reasonable accommodation (RA) request process is a confidential one that must not be shared with anyone that does not 
have a need to know.  Besides the supervisor of record (SOR) no other individual should be included or copied in the process, to 
preserve confidentiality.  The RA process starts with the request of the employee for a reasonable accommodation (RA).  The 
request can be done in any way, verbally, email, letter, etc. The SOR should request that the employee fill out a 256-0-1 form 
(Request for Reasonable Accommodation), attached, indicating what they are requesting as an accommodation, the reason for 
the request and if the request is time sensitive.  The employee must sign and date the request.  When an individual requests an 
RA, there should be an interactive process (meeting) between the SOR and the employee to better understand the employee’s 
request and needs.  If the disability is not obvious (visible), the SOR requests the employee to provide medical documentation to 
support the specific need for the RA requested.  Sufficient medical information provides the following information: 

•             Nature, severity and duration of the disability 
•             What major life activity or activities the disability impairs  
•             How the impairment of the major life activity or activities affects the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position  
•             Limitations that the disability imposes on the individual as related to the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position 
•             How the RA requested will assist the employee in the performance of the essential functions of the position  

In FEMA, the supervisor of record (SOR) is the individual that makes the decision of approving, denying or granting an alternate 
RA, after having an interactive discussion with the employee.  OER staff can participate as facilitators, or neutral parties in the 
interactive discussion, if needed.  The RA Analysts in the Office of Equal Rights (OER) RA Unit assist/facilitate the process.  As the 
RA Analyst for this case, I  will provide advice regarding the law, the policy and procedure and can provide assistance with the 
language of the response to the RA, if needed. If you need further assistance, or have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully, 

67

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

68

 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Brathwaite, Winston
Thursday, October 25, 2018 9:33 AM
Meindl, Max
RE: RA Request

Thank you Max. Have these been sent to your SOR, Ms. Detra Terry? 

Best,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, October 25, 2018 10:28 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Winston, 
Forgot to thank you for your efforts. 
Have a wonderful day…. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Wednesday, October 24, 2018 11:13 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Thank you, Mr. Meindl: 

Did you fill out the 256 Form as well? I don’t see one for you on file. I have attached it to this email for your convenience. Also, 
for future reference, due to the confidential nature of the RA process, when sending medical documents, please password 
protect them. Once I receive the completed 256 Form, I will begin processing your request. Have a great day.  

Respectfully,  
Winston 

69

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, October 24, 2018 11:57 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Winston, 
Appreciate your correspondence and assistance. 
Documents attached. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:06 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA Request 

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

My name is Winston Brathwaite. I am a Reasonable Accommodation Analyst in the Office of Equal Rights. It has come to my 
attention that you may have recently applied for a reasonable accommodation. If that is the case, I will be the analyst assigned 
to your case. I have attached to this email for your convenience the RA information sheet, and a blank FEMA 256 Form. Once I 
have received these 2 completed forms, I will begin to expeditiously process your request.  

The reasonable accommodation (RA) request process is a confidential one that must not be shared with anyone that does not 
have a need to know.  Besides the supervisor of record (SOR) no other individual should be included or copied in the process, to 
preserve confidentiality.  The RA process starts with the request of the employee for a reasonable accommodation (RA).  The 
request can be done in any way, verbally, email, letter, etc. The SOR should request that the employee fill out a 256-0-1 form 
(Request for Reasonable Accommodation), attached, indicating what they are requesting as an accommodation, the reason for 
the request and if the request is time sensitive.  The employee must sign and date the request.  When an individual requests an 
RA, there should be an interactive process (meeting) between the SOR and the employee to better understand the employee’s 
request and needs.  If the disability is not obvious (visible), the SOR requests the employee to provide medical documentation to 
support the specific need for the RA requested.  Sufficient medical information provides the following information: 

•             Nature, severity and duration of the disability 
•             What major life activity or activities the disability impairs  
•             How the impairment of the major life activity or activities affects the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position  
•             Limitations that the disability imposes on the individual as related to the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position 

70

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•             How the RA requested will assist the employee in the performance of the essential functions of the position  

In FEMA, the supervisor of record (SOR) is the individual that makes the decision of approving, denying or granting an alternate 
RA, after having an interactive discussion with the employee.  OER staff can participate as facilitators, or neutral parties in the 
interactive discussion, if needed.  The RA Analysts in the Office of Equal Rights (OER) RA Unit assist/facilitate the process.  As the 
RA Analyst for this case, I  will provide advice regarding the law, the policy and procedure and can provide assistance with the 
language of the response to the RA, if needed. If you need further assistance, or have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully, 

Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

71

 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Thursday, October 25, 2018 10:35 AM
Brathwaite, Winston
RE: RA Request

At this time, just to you Winston. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, October 25, 2018 9:33 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Thank you Max. Have these been sent to your SOR, Ms. Detra Terry? 

Best,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, October 25, 2018 10:28 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Winston, 
Forgot to thank you for your efforts. 
Have a wonderful day…. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

72

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Wednesday, October 24, 2018 11:13 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Thank you, Mr. Meindl: 

Did you fill out the 256 Form as well? I don’t see one for you on file. I have attached it to this email for your convenience. Also, 
for future reference, due to the confidential nature of the RA process, when sending medical documents, please password 
protect them. Once I receive the completed 256 Form, I will begin processing your request. Have a great day.  

Respectfully,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, October 24, 2018 11:57 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Winston, 
Appreciate your correspondence and assistance. 
Documents attached. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:06 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 

73

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA Request 

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

My name is Winston Brathwaite. I am a Reasonable Accommodation Analyst in the Office of Equal Rights. It has come to my 
attention that you may have recently applied for a reasonable accommodation. If that is the case, I will be the analyst assigned 
to your case. I have attached to this email for your convenience the RA information sheet, and a blank FEMA 256 Form. Once I 
have received these 2 completed forms, I will begin to expeditiously process your request.  

The reasonable accommodation (RA) request process is a confidential one that must not be shared with anyone that does not 
have a need to know.  Besides the supervisor of record (SOR) no other individual should be included or copied in the process, to 
preserve confidentiality.  The RA process starts with the request of the employee for a reasonable accommodation (RA).  The 
request can be done in any way, verbally, email, letter, etc. The SOR should request that the employee fill out a 256-0-1 form 
(Request for Reasonable Accommodation), attached, indicating what they are requesting as an accommodation, the reason for 
the request and if the request is time sensitive.  The employee must sign and date the request.  When an individual requests an 
RA, there should be an interactive process (meeting) between the SOR and the employee to better understand the employee’s 
request and needs.  If the disability is not obvious (visible), the SOR requests the employee to provide medical documentation to 
support the specific need for the RA requested.  Sufficient medical information provides the following information: 

•             Nature, severity and duration of the disability 
•             What major life activity or activities the disability impairs  
•             How the impairment of the major life activity or activities affects the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position  
•             Limitations that the disability imposes on the individual as related to the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position 
•             How the RA requested will assist the employee in the performance of the essential functions of the position  

In FEMA, the supervisor of record (SOR) is the individual that makes the decision of approving, denying or granting an alternate 
RA, after having an interactive discussion with the employee.  OER staff can participate as facilitators, or neutral parties in the 
interactive discussion, if needed.  The RA Analysts in the Office of Equal Rights (OER) RA Unit assist/facilitate the process.  As the 
RA Analyst for this case, I  will provide advice regarding the law, the policy and procedure and can provide assistance with the 
language of the response to the RA, if needed. If you need further assistance, or have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully, 

Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

74

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Thursday, October 25, 2018 4:39 PM
TERRY, DETRA S.
FW: RA Request
Reasonable Accomodation-FEMA Form 256-0-1-08232018-10252018.pdf

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, October 25, 2018 8:43 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Wednesday, October 24, 2018 11:13 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 

75

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cc: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Thank you, Mr. Meindl: 

Did you fill out the 256 Form as well? I don’t see one for you on file. I have attached it to this email for your convenience. Also, 
for future reference, due to the confidential nature of the RA process, when sending medical documents, please password 
protect them. Once I receive the completed 256 Form, I will begin processing your request. Have a great day.  

Respectfully,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, October 24, 2018 11:57 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Winston, 
Appreciate your correspondence and assistance. 
Documents attached. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:06 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA Request 

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

My name is Winston Brathwaite. I am a Reasonable Accommodation Analyst in the Office of Equal Rights. It has come to my 
attention that you may have recently applied for a reasonable accommodation. If that is the case, I will be the analyst assigned 
to your case. I have attached to this email for your convenience the RA information sheet, and a blank FEMA 256 Form. Once I 
have received these 2 completed forms, I will begin to expeditiously process your request.  

The reasonable accommodation (RA) request process is a confidential one that must not be shared with anyone that does not 
have a need to know.  Besides the supervisor of record (SOR) no other individual should be included or copied in the process, to 
preserve confidentiality.  The RA process starts with the request of the employee for a reasonable accommodation (RA).  The 
request can be done in any way, verbally, email, letter, etc. The SOR should request that the employee fill out a 256-0-1 form 

76

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Request for Reasonable Accommodation), attached, indicating what they are requesting as an accommodation, the reason for 
the request and if the request is time sensitive.  The employee must sign and date the request.  When an individual requests an 
RA, there should be an interactive process (meeting) between the SOR and the employee to better understand the employee’s 
request and needs.  If the disability is not obvious (visible), the SOR requests the employee to provide medical documentation to 
support the specific need for the RA requested.  Sufficient medical information provides the following information: 

•             Nature, severity and duration of the disability 
•             What major life activity or activities the disability impairs  
•             How the impairment of the major life activity or activities affects the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position  
•             Limitations that the disability imposes on the individual as related to the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position 
•             How the RA requested will assist the employee in the performance of the essential functions of the position  

In FEMA, the supervisor of record (SOR) is the individual that makes the decision of approving, denying or granting an alternate 
RA, after having an interactive discussion with the employee.  OER staff can participate as facilitators, or neutral parties in the 
interactive discussion, if needed.  The RA Analysts in the Office of Equal Rights (OER) RA Unit assist/facilitate the process.  As the 
RA Analyst for this case, I  will provide advice regarding the law, the policy and procedure and can provide assistance with the 
language of the response to the RA, if needed. If you need further assistance, or have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully, 

Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

77

 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, November 7, 2018 4:10 PM
Brathwaite, Winston; Merritt, Lisa; Henri, Foudiya; Goudy, Douglas
FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation; Asaro, Karen; TERRY, DETRA S.; femamax@gmail.com
RE: RA Request

Winston, 
I was just advised by my TFL (Detra Terry) that you were going to be closing my RA request and that I could open a new case. 
That is not acceptable to me. 
I filed my initial RA on AUGUST 23rd 2018 and here we are on November 7th , 2018 with no resolution nor response. 
I find that a tad unacceptable and would like to inquire as to why my request cannot be handled in a timely manner, approved or 
denied. 
According to policy: 
FEMA Manual 1430.1 Chg.1 December 3, 2002 
4-4 
Chapter 5 
Time Frames 
5-1. Processing Requests. FEMA will process requests for reasonable accommodation and provide accommodations, where they are appropriate, 
in as short a time frame as reasonably possible. FEMA recognizes, however, that the time necessary to process a request will depend on the 
nature of the accommodation requested and whether it is necessary to obtain supporting information. Time frames for processing requests and 
providing reasonable accommodation where no supporting information is required are as follows: 
a. Requests from applicants for employment should be expedited when necessary to ensure the applicant’s ability to compete for the position. 
However, these requests should not exceed ten (10) business days. 
b. If a request from an employee is processed by the supervisor, the request should be processed, and the accommodation, if granted, provided 
within 15 business days from the date of receipt of the request. Requests for accommodation should be expedited when the accommodation is 
needed to enable the employee to participate in an Agency activity scheduled to occur in the near future. 
(1) If the decision maker believes that it is necessary to obtain medical information to determine whether the requesting individual has a 
disability and/or to identify the functional limitations, the decision maker will request the information as soon as possible after his or her receipt 
of the request for accommodation. FEMA recognizes that the need for documentation may not become apparent until after the interactive 
process has begun. 
(2) In cases where medical documentation is needed, the accommodation, if granted, will be provided within ten (10) business days for an 
applicant, and within 15 business days for an employee, from the date the decision maker receives the relevant information, absent any 
extenuating circumstances. 
c. Where the Disability Program Manager is the decision maker on a request for reasonable accommodation, he/she will make a decision on the 
request and the  accommodation, if granted, will be provided within 15 business days from the date of the request. If medical documentation is 
necessary, the decision will be made within 15 business days of receipt of the medical information, absent any extenuating circumstances. 

All requested appropriate documentation has been provided as requested including my doctors statement. 
Please advise soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

78

 
 
From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:06 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA Request 

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

My name is Winston Brathwaite. I am a Reasonable Accommodation Analyst in the Office of Equal Rights. It has come to my 
attention that you may have recently applied for a reasonable accommodation. If that is the case, I will be the analyst assigned 
to your case. I have attached to this email for your convenience the RA information sheet, and a blank FEMA 256 Form. Once I 
have received these 2 completed forms, I will begin to expeditiously process your request.  

The reasonable accommodation (RA) request process is a confidential one that must not be shared with anyone that does not 
have a need to know.  Besides the supervisor of record (SOR) no other individual should be included or copied in the process, to 
preserve confidentiality.  The RA process starts with the request of the employee for a reasonable accommodation (RA).  The 
request can be done in any way, verbally, email, letter, etc. The SOR should request that the employee fill out a 256-0-1 form 
(Request for Reasonable Accommodation), attached, indicating what they are requesting as an accommodation, the reason for 
the request and if the request is time sensitive.  The employee must sign and date the request.  When an individual requests an 
RA, there should be an interactive process (meeting) between the SOR and the employee to better understand the employee’s 
request and needs.  If the disability is not obvious (visible), the SOR requests the employee to provide medical documentation to 
support the specific need for the RA requested.  Sufficient medical information provides the following information: 

•             Nature, severity and duration of the disability 
•             What major life activity or activities the disability impairs  
•             How the impairment of the major life activity or activities affects the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position  
•             Limitations that the disability imposes on the individual as related to the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position 
•             How the RA requested will assist the employee in the performance of the essential functions of the position  

In FEMA, the supervisor of record (SOR) is the individual that makes the decision of approving, denying or granting an alternate 
RA, after having an interactive discussion with the employee.  OER staff can participate as facilitators, or neutral parties in the 
interactive discussion, if needed.  The RA Analysts in the Office of Equal Rights (OER) RA Unit assist/facilitate the process.  As the 
RA Analyst for this case, I  will provide advice regarding the law, the policy and procedure and can provide assistance with the 
language of the response to the RA, if needed. If you need further assistance, or have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully, 

Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

79

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

Brathwaite, Winston
Thursday, November 8, 2018 6:47 AM
Meindl, Max
Terry, Detra
FW: RA Request

Please see the email string below. Supervisors of Record have 30 days within which to render a decision on a reasonable 
accommodation request. As you mentioned in your email to me, your request was submitted in August. It is now going on 
almost 120 days with no decision rendered. We cannot allow this case to languish any further. If the SOR is prepared to render a 
decision the case can be processed and closed. If not, the case will be closed until the SOR is prepared to render a decision. I 
hope this helps.  

Respectfully,  
Winston 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Wednesday, November 7, 2018 12:10 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: RA Request 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Wednesday, November 7, 2018 12:06 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Greetings, Ms. Terry. I have not heard anything back. I will therefore close this case. If you are the employee want to proceed, a 
new case can be opened. Thank you.  

Respectfully,  
Winston 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Wednesday, October 31, 2018 11:03 AM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Greetings, Ms. Terry:  

Following up on the below e-mail. Please let me know the status. Thank you.  

Regards,  
Winston 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, October 25, 2018 2:44 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: RA Request 

80

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Greetings, Ms. Terry: 

Here are the RA documents you will need to review in order to make the determination to grant or deny Mr. Max Meindl’s 
reasonable accommodation request. As the SOR, you are the deciding official. Page 2 of the 256 form should be completed by 
you. Please indicate in box #2 if the request is approved or denied. In box #16, please provide an explanation of what is being 
granted, why  it is being granted, and for what period of time. If you have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, October 25, 2018 9:45 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: RA Request 

I sent this email to you on the 15th . 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 2:02 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

FYI 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

81

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:18 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Thanks for your response, Mr. Meindl. I will follow up with your supervisor.  

Best,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 2:16 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Previously sent to my supervisor as follows: 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 1:08 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA 
See attached 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

82

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:06 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA Request 

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

My name is Winston Brathwaite. I am a Reasonable Accommodation Analyst in the Office of Equal Rights. It has come to my 
attention that you may have recently applied for a reasonable accommodation. If that is the case, I will be the analyst assigned 
to your case. I have attached to this email for your convenience the RA information sheet, and a blank FEMA 256 Form. Once I 
have received these 2 completed forms, I will begin to expeditiously process your request.  

The reasonable accommodation (RA) request process is a confidential one that must not be shared with anyone that does not 
have a need to know.  Besides the supervisor of record (SOR) no other individual should be included or copied in the process, to 
preserve confidentiality.  The RA process starts with the request of the employee for a reasonable accommodation (RA).  The 
request can be done in any way, verbally, email, letter, etc. The SOR should request that the employee fill out a 256-0-1 form 
(Request for Reasonable Accommodation), attached, indicating what they are requesting as an accommodation, the reason for 
the request and if the request is time sensitive.  The employee must sign and date the request.  When an individual requests an 
RA, there should be an interactive process (meeting) between the SOR and the employee to better understand the employee’s 
request and needs.  If the disability is not obvious (visible), the SOR requests the employee to provide medical documentation to 
support the specific need for the RA requested.  Sufficient medical information provides the following information: 

•             Nature, severity and duration of the disability 
•             What major life activity or activities the disability impairs  
•             How the impairment of the major life activity or activities affects the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position  
•             Limitations that the disability imposes on the individual as related to the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position 
•             How the RA requested will assist the employee in the performance of the essential functions of the position  

In FEMA, the supervisor of record (SOR) is the individual that makes the decision of approving, denying or granting an alternate 
RA, after having an interactive discussion with the employee.  OER staff can participate as facilitators, or neutral parties in the 
interactive discussion, if needed.  The RA Analysts in the Office of Equal Rights (OER) RA Unit assist/facilitate the process.  As the 
RA Analyst for this case, I  will provide advice regarding the law, the policy and procedure and can provide assistance with the 
language of the response to the RA, if needed. If you need further assistance, or have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully, 

Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

83

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Good morning Max, 

Merritt, Lisa
Thursday, November 8, 2018 6:51 AM
Meindl, Max; Brathwaite, Winston; Henri, Foudiya
RE: RA Request

I spoke with you several weeks ago and discussed that we received your RA Request Form, but no 
healthcare documentation. At that time, you said you would need to meet with a cardiologist to obtain 
requested paperwork. We are more than happy to assist you with the process. Will you be able to provide 
documentation shortly? Would you like to have another discussion as to what is required in the physician’s 
note? I believe you are requesting a reasonable accommodation to telework. Have you spoke with field 
leadership and Equal Rights to see if they can accommodate this request and work from an alternative 
location? 

Thank you, 

Lisa Merritt|Asst. Reservist Program Manager 
Public Assistance Division 
Field Support Branch 
FEMA | HQ 
202-212-2524 | lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov  
FEMA-PA-Reservist-Program@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, November 7, 2018 5:10 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya 
<Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas <Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Asaro, Karen 
<Karen.Asaro@fema.dhs.gov>; Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov>; femamax@gmail.com 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Winston, 
I was just advised by my TFL (Detra Terry) that you were going to be closing my RA request and that I could open a new case. 
That is not acceptable to me. 
I filed my initial RA on AUGUST 23rd 2018 and here we are on November 7th , 2018 with no resolution nor response. 
I find that a tad unacceptable and would like to inquire as to why my request cannot be handled in a timely manner, approved or 
denied. 
According to policy: 
FEMA Manual 1430.1 Chg.1 December 3, 2002 
4-4 
Chapter 5 
Time Frames 
5-1. Processing Requests. FEMA will process requests for reasonable accommodation and provide accommodations, where they are appropriate, 
in as short a time frame as reasonably possible. FEMA recognizes, however, that the time necessary to process a request will depend on the 
nature of the accommodation requested and whether it is necessary to obtain supporting information. Time frames for processing requests and 
providing reasonable accommodation where no supporting information is required are as follows: 
a. Requests from applicants for employment should be expedited when necessary to ensure the applicant’s ability to compete for the position. 
However, these requests should not exceed ten (10) business days. 

84

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
b. If a request from an employee is processed by the supervisor, the request should be processed, and the accommodation, if granted, provided 
within 15 business days from the date of receipt of the request. Requests for accommodation should be expedited when the accommodation is 
needed to enable the employee to participate in an Agency activity scheduled to occur in the near future. 
(1) If the decision maker believes that it is necessary to obtain medical information to determine whether the requesting individual has a 
disability and/or to identify the functional limitations, the decision maker will request the information as soon as possible after his or her receipt 
of the request for accommodation. FEMA recognizes that the need for documentation may not become apparent until after the interactive 
process has begun. 
(2) In cases where medical documentation is needed, the accommodation, if granted, will be provided within ten (10) business days for an 
applicant, and within 15 business days for an employee, from the date the decision maker receives the relevant information, absent any 
extenuating circumstances. 
c. Where the Disability Program Manager is the decision maker on a request for reasonable accommodation, he/she will make a decision on the 
request and the  accommodation, if granted, will be provided within 15 business days from the date of the request. If medical documentation is 
necessary, the decision will be made within 15 business days of receipt of the medical information, absent any extenuating circumstances. 

All requested appropriate documentation has been provided as requested including my doctors statement. 
Please advise soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:06 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA Request 

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

My name is Winston Brathwaite. I am a Reasonable Accommodation Analyst in the Office of Equal Rights. It has come to my 
attention that you may have recently applied for a reasonable accommodation. If that is the case, I will be the analyst assigned 
to your case. I have attached to this email for your convenience the RA information sheet, and a blank FEMA 256 Form. Once I 
have received these 2 completed forms, I will begin to expeditiously process your request.  

The reasonable accommodation (RA) request process is a confidential one that must not be shared with anyone that does not 
have a need to know.  Besides the supervisor of record (SOR) no other individual should be included or copied in the process, to 
preserve confidentiality.  The RA process starts with the request of the employee for a reasonable accommodation (RA).  The 
request can be done in any way, verbally, email, letter, etc. The SOR should request that the employee fill out a 256-0-1 form 
(Request for Reasonable Accommodation), attached, indicating what they are requesting as an accommodation, the reason for 
the request and if the request is time sensitive.  The employee must sign and date the request.  When an individual requests an 
RA, there should be an interactive process (meeting) between the SOR and the employee to better understand the employee’s 
request and needs.  If the disability is not obvious (visible), the SOR requests the employee to provide medical documentation to 
support the specific need for the RA requested.  Sufficient medical information provides the following information: 

85

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•             Nature, severity and duration of the disability 
•             What major life activity or activities the disability impairs  
•             How the impairment of the major life activity or activities affects the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position  
•             Limitations that the disability imposes on the individual as related to the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position 
•             How the RA requested will assist the employee in the performance of the essential functions of the position  

In FEMA, the supervisor of record (SOR) is the individual that makes the decision of approving, denying or granting an alternate 
RA, after having an interactive discussion with the employee.  OER staff can participate as facilitators, or neutral parties in the 
interactive discussion, if needed.  The RA Analysts in the Office of Equal Rights (OER) RA Unit assist/facilitate the process.  As the 
RA Analyst for this case, I  will provide advice regarding the law, the policy and procedure and can provide assistance with the 
language of the response to the RA, if needed. If you need further assistance, or have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully, 

Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

86

 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

FYSA 

Brathwaite, Winston
Thursday, November 8, 2018 6:54 AM
Merritt, Lisa
Meindl, Max; Terry, Detra; Henri, Foudiya
FW: RA Request

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, November 8, 2018 7:47 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: RA Request 

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

Please see the email string below. Supervisors of Record have 30 days within which to render a decision on a reasonable 
accommodation request. As you mentioned in your email to me, your request was submitted in August. It is now going on 
almost 120 days with no decision rendered. We cannot allow this case to languish any further. If the SOR is prepared to render a 
decision the case can be processed and closed. If not, the case will be closed until the SOR is prepared to render a decision. I 
hope this helps.  

Respectfully,  
Winston 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Wednesday, November 7, 2018 12:10 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: RA Request 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Wednesday, November 7, 2018 12:06 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Greetings, Ms. Terry. I have not heard anything back. I will therefore close this case. If you are the employee want to proceed, a 
new case can be opened. Thank you.  

Respectfully,  
Winston 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Wednesday, October 31, 2018 11:03 AM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Greetings, Ms. Terry:  

Following up on the below e-mail. Please let me know the status. Thank you.  

87

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regards,  
Winston 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, October 25, 2018 2:44 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: RA Request 

Greetings, Ms. Terry: 

Here are the RA documents you will need to review in order to make the determination to grant or deny Mr. Max Meindl’s 
reasonable accommodation request. As the SOR, you are the deciding official. Page 2 of the 256 form should be completed by 
you. Please indicate in box #2 if the request is approved or denied. In box #16, please provide an explanation of what is being 
granted, why  it is being granted, and for what period of time. If you have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, October 25, 2018 9:45 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: RA Request 

I sent this email to you on the 15th . 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 2:02 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

FYI 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 

88

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:18 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Thanks for your response, Mr. Meindl. I will follow up with your supervisor.  

Best,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 2:16 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Previously sent to my supervisor as follows: 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 1:08 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA 
See attached 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

89

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:06 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA Request 

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

My name is Winston Brathwaite. I am a Reasonable Accommodation Analyst in the Office of Equal Rights. It has come to my 
attention that you may have recently applied for a reasonable accommodation. If that is the case, I will be the analyst assigned 
to your case. I have attached to this email for your convenience the RA information sheet, and a blank FEMA 256 Form. Once I 
have received these 2 completed forms, I will begin to expeditiously process your request.  

The reasonable accommodation (RA) request process is a confidential one that must not be shared with anyone that does not 
have a need to know.  Besides the supervisor of record (SOR) no other individual should be included or copied in the process, to 
preserve confidentiality.  The RA process starts with the request of the employee for a reasonable accommodation (RA).  The 
request can be done in any way, verbally, email, letter, etc. The SOR should request that the employee fill out a 256-0-1 form 
(Request for Reasonable Accommodation), attached, indicating what they are requesting as an accommodation, the reason for 
the request and if the request is time sensitive.  The employee must sign and date the request.  When an individual requests an 
RA, there should be an interactive process (meeting) between the SOR and the employee to better understand the employee’s 
request and needs.  If the disability is not obvious (visible), the SOR requests the employee to provide medical documentation to 
support the specific need for the RA requested.  Sufficient medical information provides the following information: 

•             Nature, severity and duration of the disability 
•             What major life activity or activities the disability impairs  
•             How the impairment of the major life activity or activities affects the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position  
•             Limitations that the disability imposes on the individual as related to the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position 
•             How the RA requested will assist the employee in the performance of the essential functions of the position  

In FEMA, the supervisor of record (SOR) is the individual that makes the decision of approving, denying or granting an alternate 
RA, after having an interactive discussion with the employee.  OER staff can participate as facilitators, or neutral parties in the 
interactive discussion, if needed.  The RA Analysts in the Office of Equal Rights (OER) RA Unit assist/facilitate the process.  As the 
RA Analyst for this case, I  will provide advice regarding the law, the policy and procedure and can provide assistance with the 
language of the response to the RA, if needed. If you need further assistance, or have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully, 

Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 

90

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

91

 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Thursday, November 8, 2018 7:26 AM
Brathwaite, Winston; Merritt, Lisa
Terry, Detra; Henri, Foudiya
Re: RA Request

Doctors Information was provided to Winston several weeks ago  

Get Outlook for iOS 

From: Brathwaite, Winston 
Sent: Thursday, November 8, 2018 6:53:54 AM 
To: Merritt, Lisa 
Cc: Meindl, Max; Terry, Detra; Henri, Foudiya 
Subject: FW: RA Request  

FYSA 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, November 8, 2018 7:47 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: RA Request 

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

Please see the email string below. Supervisors of Record have 30 days within which to render a decision on a reasonable 
accommodation request. As you mentioned in your email to me, your request was submitted in August. It is now going on 
almost 120 days with no decision rendered. We cannot allow this case to languish any further. If the SOR is prepared to render a 
decision the case can be processed and closed. If not, the case will be closed until the SOR is prepared to render a decision. I 
hope this helps.  

Respectfully,  
Winston 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Wednesday, November 7, 2018 12:10 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: RA Request 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Wednesday, November 7, 2018 12:06 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Greetings, Ms. Terry. I have not heard anything back. I will therefore close this case. If you are the employee want to proceed, a 
new case can be opened. Thank you.  

Respectfully,  
Winston 

92

 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Wednesday, October 31, 2018 11:03 AM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Greetings, Ms. Terry:  

Following up on the below e-mail. Please let me know the status. Thank you.  

Regards,  
Winston 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, October 25, 2018 2:44 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: RA Request 

Greetings, Ms. Terry: 

Here are the RA documents you will need to review in order to make the determination to grant or deny Mr. Max Meindl’s 
reasonable accommodation request. As the SOR, you are the deciding official. Page 2 of the 256 form should be completed by 
you. Please indicate in box #2 if the request is approved or denied. In box #16, please provide an explanation of what is being 
granted, why  it is being granted, and for what period of time. If you have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, October 25, 2018 9:45 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: RA Request 

I sent this email to you on the 15th . 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 2:02 PM 

93

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

FYI 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:18 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Thanks for your response, Mr. Meindl. I will follow up with your supervisor.  

Best,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 2:16 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Previously sent to my supervisor as follows: 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 1:08 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA 
See attached 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

Max J Meindl, PMP 

94

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:06 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA Request 

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

My name is Winston Brathwaite. I am a Reasonable Accommodation Analyst in the Office of Equal Rights. It has come to my 
attention that you may have recently applied for a reasonable accommodation. If that is the case, I will be the analyst assigned 
to your case. I have attached to this email for your convenience the RA information sheet, and a blank FEMA 256 Form. Once I 
have received these 2 completed forms, I will begin to expeditiously process your request.  

The reasonable accommodation (RA) request process is a confidential one that must not be shared with anyone that does not 
have a need to know.  Besides the supervisor of record (SOR) no other individual should be included or copied in the process, to 
preserve confidentiality.  The RA process starts with the request of the employee for a reasonable accommodation (RA).  The 
request can be done in any way, verbally, email, letter, etc. The SOR should request that the employee fill out a 256-0-1 form 
(Request for Reasonable Accommodation), attached, indicating what they are requesting as an accommodation, the reason for 
the request and if the request is time sensitive.  The employee must sign and date the request.  When an individual requests an 
RA, there should be an interactive process (meeting) between the SOR and the employee to better understand the employee’s 
request and needs.  If the disability is not obvious (visible), the SOR requests the employee to provide medical documentation to 
support the specific need for the RA requested.  Sufficient medical information provides the following information: 

•             Nature, severity and duration of the disability 
•             What major life activity or activities the disability impairs  
•             How the impairment of the major life activity or activities affects the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position  
•             Limitations that the disability imposes on the individual as related to the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position 
•             How the RA requested will assist the employee in the performance of the essential functions of the position  

In FEMA, the supervisor of record (SOR) is the individual that makes the decision of approving, denying or granting an alternate 
RA, after having an interactive discussion with the employee.  OER staff can participate as facilitators, or neutral parties in the 
interactive discussion, if needed.  The RA Analysts in the Office of Equal Rights (OER) RA Unit assist/facilitate the process.  As the 
RA Analyst for this case, I  will provide advice regarding the law, the policy and procedure and can provide assistance with the 
language of the response to the RA, if needed. If you need further assistance, or have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully, 

95

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

96

  
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:
Attachments:

Brathwaite, Winston
Thursday, November 8, 2018 7:31 AM
Meindl, Max
Terry, Detra; Merritt, Lisa; Henri, Foudiya
FW: RA Request
RA INFORMATION SHEET-Vista-Meindl.doc; RA information.pdf; Reasonable Accomodation-FEMA Form 256-0-1-08232018.pdf; 
Reasonable Accomodation-FEMA Form 256-0-1-08232018.pdf

FYSA. Documentation was forwarded to the SOR. Did the employee provide the medical documentation requested by the 
SOR/cadre to his SOR? 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, October 25, 2018 2:44 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: RA Request 

Greetings, Ms. Terry: 

Here are the RA documents you will need to review in order to make the determination to grant or deny Mr. Max Meindl’s 
reasonable accommodation request. As the SOR, you are the deciding official. Page 2 of the 256 form should be completed by 
you. Please indicate in box #2 if the request is approved or denied. In box #16, please provide an explanation of what is being 
granted, why  it is being granted, and for what period of time. If you have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, October 25, 2018 9:45 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: RA Request 

I sent this email to you on the 15th . 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 2:02 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
97

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

FYI 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:18 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Thanks for your response, Mr. Meindl. I will follow up with your supervisor.  

Best,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 2:16 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: RA Request 

Previously sent to my supervisor as follows: 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, August 23, 2018 1:08 PM 
To: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA 
See attached 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 

98

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Monday, October 15, 2018 1:06 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA Request 

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

My name is Winston Brathwaite. I am a Reasonable Accommodation Analyst in the Office of Equal Rights. It has come to my 
attention that you may have recently applied for a reasonable accommodation. If that is the case, I will be the analyst assigned 
to your case. I have attached to this email for your convenience the RA information sheet, and a blank FEMA 256 Form. Once I 
have received these 2 completed forms, I will begin to expeditiously process your request.  

The reasonable accommodation (RA) request process is a confidential one that must not be shared with anyone that does not 
have a need to know.  Besides the supervisor of record (SOR) no other individual should be included or copied in the process, to 
preserve confidentiality.  The RA process starts with the request of the employee for a reasonable accommodation (RA).  The 
request can be done in any way, verbally, email, letter, etc. The SOR should request that the employee fill out a 256-0-1 form 
(Request for Reasonable Accommodation), attached, indicating what they are requesting as an accommodation, the reason for 
the request and if the request is time sensitive.  The employee must sign and date the request.  When an individual requests an 
RA, there should be an interactive process (meeting) between the SOR and the employee to better understand the employee’s 
request and needs.  If the disability is not obvious (visible), the SOR requests the employee to provide medical documentation to 
support the specific need for the RA requested.  Sufficient medical information provides the following information: 

•             Nature, severity and duration of the disability 
•             What major life activity or activities the disability impairs  
•             How the impairment of the major life activity or activities affects the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position  
•             Limitations that the disability imposes on the individual as related to the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position 
•             How the RA requested will assist the employee in the performance of the essential functions of the position  

In FEMA, the supervisor of record (SOR) is the individual that makes the decision of approving, denying or granting an alternate 
RA, after having an interactive discussion with the employee.  OER staff can participate as facilitators, or neutral parties in the 
interactive discussion, if needed.  The RA Analysts in the Office of Equal Rights (OER) RA Unit assist/facilitate the process.  As the 
RA Analyst for this case, I  will provide advice regarding the law, the policy and procedure and can provide assistance with the 
language of the response to the RA, if needed. If you need further assistance, or have any questions, please let me know.  

Respectfully, 

99

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

100

 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:
Attachments:

Greetings, Ms. McAllister: 

Brathwaite, Winston
Thursday, November 8, 2018 8:53 AM
McAllister, Jamie
Meindl, Max
RA Request
Dr. Gay (002).pdf; RA INFORMATION SHEET-Vista-Meindl (005).pdf; Reasonable Accomodation-FEMA Form 256-0-1-08232018 
(005).pdf; blank FEMA Form 256-0-1.pdf

It was a pleasure to talk to you on the phone. Per our conversation, Mr. Max Meindl has filed a request for a reasonable 
accommodation. I am the Reasonable Accommodation Analyst assigned to the case and will be working with you on the request. 
If you are not familiar with the process, the reasonable accommodation (RA) request process is a confidential one that must not 
be shared with anyone that does not have a need to know.  Besides the supervisor of record (SOR), no other individual should be 
included or copied in the process, to preserve confidentiality.  The RA process starts with the request of the employee for a 
reasonable accommodation (RA), attached.  The request can be done in any way, verbally, email, letter, etc. The SOR should 
request that the employee fill out a 256-0-1 form (Request for Reasonable Accommodation), attached, indicating what they are 
requesting as an accommodation, the reason for the request and if the request is time sensitive.  The employee must sign and 
date the request.  When an individual requests an RA, there should be an interactive process (meeting) between the SOR and 
the employee to better understand the employee’s request and needs.  If the disability is not obvious (visible), or the SOR is not 
familiar with the employee’s circumstances, the SOR requests the employee to provide medical documentation to support the 
need for the RA requested.  Sufficient medical information provides the following information: 

•             Nature, severity and duration of the disability 
•             What major life activity or activities the disability impairs  
•             How the impairment of the major life activity or activities affects the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position  
•             Limitations that the disability imposes on the individual as related to the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position 
•             How the RA requested will assist the employee in the performance of the essential functions of the position  

Since the medical provider may not be familiar with the essential functions of the employee’s position, here is some guidance to 
be applied in making the decision, regarding how essential functions are determined, as outlined in FEMA’s RA policy: 

Essential functions are “those job duties so fundamental to the position that the individual holds or desires that he/she cannot 
do the job without performing them. A function can be “essential” if, among other things, the position exists specifically to 
perform that function; there are a limited number of other employees who could perform the function; and/or the function is 
highly specialized and the individual is hired based on his/her expertise or ability to perform it. Determination of the essential 
functions of a position must be done on a case-by-case basis so that it reflects the job as actually performed, and not simply the 
components of a generic position description.” 

In FEMA, the supervisor of record (SOR) is the individual that makes the decision of approving, denying or granting an alternate 
RA, after having an interactive discussion with the employee.  OER staff can participate as facilitators, or neutral parties in the 
interactive discussion, if needed. OER’s role is to assist managers with the timely processing of reasonable accommodation 
requests consistent with all relevant statutes, regulations, EEOC, case law and the FEMA RA Policy.  A supervisor has 30 days to 
make a decision on the employee’s request.  As the RA Analyst assigned to this case, I will provide advice to you regarding the 
law, the policy and procedure and can provide assistance with the language of the response to the RA, if needed. I have also 
attached Mr. Meindl’s RA information sheet for you. Please also note that page 2 of the 256 Form must be filled out by you, with 
block 2 indicating whether the request is granted, and block 16 providing an explanation for what is being granted, and for what 
period of time. I have attached a blank 256 Form so that you can complete and return page 2 of it to me. I have also attached 
the medical documentation provided by Mr. Meindl’s health care provider. Because it includes pii, I have password protected it. 
The password will be sent to you in a separate email. If you have any questions, or need any assistance, please let me know. I 
look forward to working with you. 

101

 
 
 
 
 
Respectfully, 

Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

102

 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Thursday, November 8, 2018 1:36 PM
femamax@gmail.com
FW: RA Request
Dr. Gay (002).pdf; RA INFORMATION SHEET-Vista-Meindl (005).pdf; Reasonable Accomodation-FEMA Form 256-0-1-08232018 
(005).pdf; blank FEMA Form 256-0-1.pdf

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, November 8, 2018 8:53 AM 
To: McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA Request 

Greetings, Ms. McAllister: 

It was a pleasure to talk to you on the phone. Per our conversation, Mr. Max Meindl has filed a request for a reasonable 
accommodation. I am the Reasonable Accommodation Analyst assigned to the case and will be working with you on the request. 
If you are not familiar with the process, the reasonable accommodation (RA) request process is a confidential one that must not 
be shared with anyone that does not have a need to know.  Besides the supervisor of record (SOR), no other individual should be 
included or copied in the process, to preserve confidentiality.  The RA process starts with the request of the employee for a 
reasonable accommodation (RA), attached.  The request can be done in any way, verbally, email, letter, etc. The SOR should 
request that the employee fill out a 256-0-1 form (Request for Reasonable Accommodation), attached, indicating what they are 
requesting as an accommodation, the reason for the request and if the request is time sensitive.  The employee must sign and 
date the request.  When an individual requests an RA, there should be an interactive process (meeting) between the SOR and 
the employee to better understand the employee’s request and needs.  If the disability is not obvious (visible), or the SOR is not 
familiar with the employee’s circumstances, the SOR requests the employee to provide medical documentation to support the 
need for the RA requested.  Sufficient medical information provides the following information: 

•             Nature, severity and duration of the disability 
•             What major life activity or activities the disability impairs  
•             How the impairment of the major life activity or activities affects the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position  
•             Limitations that the disability imposes on the individual as related to the performance of the essential functions of the 
individual’s position 

103

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•             How the RA requested will assist the employee in the performance of the essential functions of the position  

Since the medical provider may not be familiar with the essential functions of the employee’s position, here is some guidance to 
be applied in making the decision, regarding how essential functions are determined, as outlined in FEMA’s RA policy: 

Essential functions are “those job duties so fundamental to the position that the individual holds or desires that he/she cannot 
do the job without performing them. A function can be “essential” if, among other things, the position exists specifically to 
perform that function; there are a limited number of other employees who could perform the function; and/or the function is 
highly specialized and the individual is hired based on his/her expertise or ability to perform it. Determination of the essential 
functions of a position must be done on a case-by-case basis so that it reflects the job as actually performed, and not simply the 
components of a generic position description.” 

In FEMA, the supervisor of record (SOR) is the individual that makes the decision of approving, denying or granting an alternate 
RA, after having an interactive discussion with the employee.  OER staff can participate as facilitators, or neutral parties in the 
interactive discussion, if needed. OER’s role is to assist managers with the timely processing of reasonable accommodation 
requests consistent with all relevant statutes, regulations, EEOC, case law and the FEMA RA Policy.  A supervisor has 30 days to 
make a decision on the employee’s request.  As the RA Analyst assigned to this case, I will provide advice to you regarding the 
law, the policy and procedure and can provide assistance with the language of the response to the RA, if needed. I have also 
attached Mr. Meindl’s RA information sheet for you. Please also note that page 2 of the 256 Form must be filled out by you, with 
block 2 indicating whether the request is granted, and block 16 providing an explanation for what is being granted, and for what 
period of time. I have attached a blank 256 Form so that you can complete and return page 2 of it to me. I have also attached 
the medical documentation provided by Mr. Meindl’s health care provider. Because it includes pii, I have password protected it. 
The password will be sent to you in a separate email. If you have any questions, or need any assistance, please let me know. I 
look forward to working with you. 

Respectfully, 

Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

104

 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:
Attachments:

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

Brathwaite, Winston
Wednesday, November 14, 2018 2:21 PM
Meindl, Max
Terry, Detra
256 Form
RA INFORMATION SHEET-empl.doc; blank FEMA Form 256-0-1.pdf

I just spoke to your Supervisor of Record, Ms. Detra Terry, who is included in this email, regarding your recent reasonable 
accommodation request. Now that it appears all the documents are ready, this should hopefully not take very long to process. I 
have attached a blank 256 Form to this email for you to fill out at your convenience, as well as an RA information sheet. Once 
completed, these and the other supporting documentation for your request can be submitted via email to the FEMA-
Reasonable-Accommodation@fema.dhs.gov inbox for re-assignment. Thank you very much.   

Respectfully, 

Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

105

 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Thursday, November 15, 2018 9:22 AM
Brathwaite, Winston
Terry, Detra
RE: 256 Form

Winston, 
I’ve already submitted all of these documents and my supervisor of record, per our discussion last week (11/08/2018 @ 08:21 HRS 
for 2 minutes), is: 

Jamie McAllister 
Deputy Infrastructure Branch Director  
DR 4332 TX JFO Austin 
Region 6 Infrastructure Branch 
DHS/FEMA 
(202) 709-0851 Cell 
jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Wednesday, November 14, 2018 2:21 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: 256 Form 

Greetings, Mr. Meindl: 

I just spoke to your Supervisor of Record, Ms. Detra Terry, who is included in this email, regarding your recent reasonable 
accommodation request. Now that it appears all the documents are ready, this should hopefully not take very long to process. I 
have attached a blank 256 Form to this email for you to fill out at your convenience, as well as an RA information sheet. Once 
completed, these and the other supporting documentation for your request can be submitted via email to the FEMA-
Reasonable-Accommodation@fema.dhs.gov inbox for re-assignment. Thank you very much.   

Respectfully, 

Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D. 

106

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Affirmative Employment Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 
20472-3505 | Desk: 202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Efax: | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
WARNING: This document and attachments are for official use only. It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed and disposed of in 
accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information. This information shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee 
without prior authorization of the originator. This communication along with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic 
communications and may contain restricted and legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability 
with civil and criminal penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or otherwise 
use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

107

 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

femamax@gmail.com
Wednesday, December 12, 2018 3:50 PM
Meindl, Max
ra

December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 13th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.  As of this 
date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.  Although the RA request has passed through many 
hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen it important enough to respond to my RA 
request.  When considering that over four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.  I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be 
provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.  I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as 
required by policy.  Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?  All 
requested and required information has been provided per policy and if you have any questions, please feel free to contact me. 
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

108

Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Greetings -  

Fernandez, Luz
Wednesday, December 12, 2018 4:09 PM
Meindl, Max
Automatic reply: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

I'm out of the office on extended leave. I will have limited access to my phone and e-mails.  For urgent matters, call the 
Office of Equal Rights Reasonable Accommodation Unit at 202-212-3535 Option 2. 

Please forward all requests for reasonable accommodations directly to FEMA Reasonable Accommodation mailbox: 
FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation@fema.dhs.gov. 

For ASL Reasonable Accommodations support, email: FEMA-Reasonable- Accommodation@fema.dhs.gov, copy 
Carol Curtis: Carol.Curtis@fema.dhs.gov and Gavin Junkins at gavin.n.junkins@fema.dhs.gov. 

Thank you -  

Luz A. Fernandez 

109

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Henri, Foudiya
Wednesday, December 12, 2018 4:09 PM
Meindl, Max
Automatic reply: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

I am out on use or lose leave from DEC. 10 - JAN. 5. 

For a NEW RA Request please forward dirctly to FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation@fema.dhs.gov for a RA 
Team member to assit. 

For follow up to an existing request my back up while I am away is Mr. Winston. 
Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov.  For follow up please contact Mr. Brathwaithe directly and copy me.  You do not 
need to copy the FEMA RA mailbox. 

Thank you  
Foudiya Henri 
DHS-FEMA 
Office of Equal Rights 
202-212-4490 Desk 
202-394-4633 Cell 

110

 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Mr. Meindl, 

Brathwaite, Winston
Thursday, December 13, 2018 6:38 AM
Meindl, Max
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

I was under the impression your SOR was granted. Please contact your SOR for clarification.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 5:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

111

 
 
 
 
 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

112

 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Good morning –  

FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation
Thursday, December 13, 2018 7:35 AM
Meindl, Max; Brathwaite, Winston
FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

To whom did you submit your request?  The supervisor of record is the decision maker on all RA request.  OER’s role is to 
provide technical guidance to managers and employees to ensure that RA requests are processed in accordance with FEMA’s RA 
policy and the law.   

I note that Winston in our office is the case manager assigned to this request.  We will follow-up with you and your supervisor to 
determine the status of your request.  As RAs are confidential, I have replied and omitted the other recipients included on the 
email below.  

Donna M. Peterkin  
Deputy Director  
Office of Equal Rights (OER)  

For Official Use Only - Privacy Act Sensitive. This document was prepared by DHS/FEMA and is covered by federal and state 
law governing electronic communications.  It may contain confidential, pre-decisional, and/or sensitive Government information, 
and is not for release, review, retransmission, dissemination or use by anyone other than the intended recipient.  Please consult the 
original sender before disclosing any information contained herein.  If you have received this in error, please reply immediately to 
the sender and delete this message. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 5:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   

113

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

114

 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:31 AM
TERRY, DETRA S.
FW: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

Detra, 
Please see below and contact Jamie for me, please. 
According to Winston, it was granted. 
I’m at a loss to understand. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 6:38 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Mr. Meindl, 

I was under the impression your SOR was granted. Please contact your SOR for clarification.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 5:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   

115

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

116

 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:32 AM
Brathwaite, Winston
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

I don’t understand Winston. 
Was the RA granted or the Supervisor of Record (SOR) identified? 
Appreciate all you’ve done Winston. 
Thank you very much. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 6:38 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Mr. Meindl, 

I was under the impression your SOR was granted. Please contact your SOR for clarification.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 5:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   

117

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

118

 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:34 AM
Brathwaite, Winston
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

I noticed that Ms. McAllister did approve an annual leave request yesterday but that is all I see anywhere. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 6:38 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Mr. Meindl, 

I was under the impression your SOR was granted. Please contact your SOR for clarification.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 5:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   

119

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

120

 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Brathwaite, Winston
Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:35 AM
Meindl, Max
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

From what I understand, yes. However, if you have not been informed, I will reach back and see what happened. It may be that 
you simply were not informed of your approval by your SOR. Let me check and see.  

Respectfully,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:32 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

I don’t understand Winston. 
Was the RA granted or the Supervisor of Record (SOR) identified? 
Appreciate all you’ve done Winston. 
Thank you very much. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 6:38 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Mr. Meindl, 

I was under the impression your SOR was granted. Please contact your SOR for clarification.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 5:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 

121

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

122

 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Brathwaite, Winston
Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:36 AM
Meindl, Max
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

Ok. Let me see if I can figure out what is going on. Bear with me. I will get back to you as soon as I can.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:34 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

I noticed that Ms. McAllister did approve an annual leave request yesterday but that is all I see anywhere. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 6:38 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Mr. Meindl, 

I was under the impression your SOR was granted. Please contact your SOR for clarification.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 5:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

123

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

124

 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:38 AM
Brathwaite, Winston
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

Thank you very much. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:35 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

From what I understand, yes. However, if you have not been informed, I will reach back and see what happened. It may be that 
you simply were not informed of your approval by your SOR. Let me check and see.  

Respectfully,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:32 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

I don’t understand Winston. 
Was the RA granted or the Supervisor of Record (SOR) identified? 
Appreciate all you’ve done Winston. 
Thank you very much. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

125

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 6:38 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Mr. Meindl, 

I was under the impression your SOR was granted. Please contact your SOR for clarification.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 5:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 

126

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

127

 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:39 AM
Brathwaite, Winston
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

10-4 Winston, thank you. 
The specific RA would have assisted in my situation for the past few days if it is actually in place. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:36 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Ok. Let me see if I can figure out what is going on. Bear with me. I will get back to you as soon as I can.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:34 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

I noticed that Ms. McAllister did approve an annual leave request yesterday but that is all I see anywhere. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

128

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 6:38 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Mr. Meindl, 

I was under the impression your SOR was granted. Please contact your SOR for clarification.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 5:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

129

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

130

 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Brathwaite, Winston
Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:42 AM
Meindl, Max
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

Ok. The point of the RA is to assist you in doing your job. So, I apologize if you were not informed, or it was not put in place for 
you. I am sure there is a simple solution to this. Something may have just fallen through the cracks. As soon as I hear something, 
I will reach out to you and let you know.  

-W 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:39 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

10-4 Winston, thank you. 
The specific RA would have assisted in my situation for the past few days if it is actually in place. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:36 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Ok. Let me see if I can figure out what is going on. Bear with me. I will get back to you as soon as I can.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:34 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

I noticed that Ms. McAllister did approve an annual leave request yesterday but that is all I see anywhere. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 

131

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 6:38 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Mr. Meindl, 

I was under the impression your SOR was granted. Please contact your SOR for clarification.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 5:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 

132

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

133

 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:45 AM
Brathwaite, Winston
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

Thank you Winston, you’re a gentleman and scholar in my book. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:42 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Ok. The point of the RA is to assist you in doing your job. So, I apologize if you were not informed, or it was not put in place for 
you. I am sure there is a simple solution to this. Something may have just fallen through the cracks. As soon as I hear something, 
I will reach out to you and let you know.  

-W 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:39 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

10-4 Winston, thank you. 
The specific RA would have assisted in my situation for the past few days if it is actually in place. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

134

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:36 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Ok. Let me see if I can figure out what is going on. Bear with me. I will get back to you as soon as I can.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:34 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

I noticed that Ms. McAllister did approve an annual leave request yesterday but that is all I see anywhere. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 6:38 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Mr. Meindl, 

I was under the impression your SOR was granted. Please contact your SOR for clarification.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 5:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 

135

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

136

 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:05 AM
TERRY, DETRA S.
FW: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

Please see below, from Winston. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:04 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Thanks Max. If I knew you were unaware I would have acted sooner. I really thought you had been informed this was granted. 
Still working on it to see what happened.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:45 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Thank you Winston, you’re a gentleman and scholar in my book. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

137

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:42 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Ok. The point of the RA is to assist you in doing your job. So, I apologize if you were not informed, or it was not put in place for 
you. I am sure there is a simple solution to this. Something may have just fallen through the cracks. As soon as I hear something, 
I will reach out to you and let you know.  

-W 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:39 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

10-4 Winston, thank you. 
The specific RA would have assisted in my situation for the past few days if it is actually in place. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:36 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Ok. Let me see if I can figure out what is going on. Bear with me. I will get back to you as soon as I can.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:34 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

I noticed that Ms. McAllister did approve an annual leave request yesterday but that is all I see anywhere. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 

138

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 6:38 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Mr. Meindl, 

I was under the impression your SOR was granted. Please contact your SOR for clarification.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 5:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

139

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

140

 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Brathwaite, Winston
Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:04 AM
Meindl, Max
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

Thanks Max. If I knew you were unaware I would have acted sooner. I really thought you had been informed this was granted. 
Still working on it to see what happened.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:45 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Thank you Winston, you’re a gentleman and scholar in my book. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:42 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Ok. The point of the RA is to assist you in doing your job. So, I apologize if you were not informed, or it was not put in place for 
you. I am sure there is a simple solution to this. Something may have just fallen through the cracks. As soon as I hear something, 
I will reach out to you and let you know.  

-W 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:39 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

10-4 Winston, thank you. 
The specific RA would have assisted in my situation for the past few days if it is actually in place. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 

141

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:36 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Ok. Let me see if I can figure out what is going on. Bear with me. I will get back to you as soon as I can.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:34 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

I noticed that Ms. McAllister did approve an annual leave request yesterday but that is all I see anywhere. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 6:38 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Mr. Meindl, 

I was under the impression your SOR was granted. Please contact your SOR for clarification.  

142

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 5:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

143

 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Thursday, December 13, 2018 11:51 AM
Brathwaite, Winston
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

Winston, 
Any update or is everything still unclear? 

Regards, 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:04 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Thanks Max. If I knew you were unaware I would have acted sooner. I really thought you had been informed this was granted. 
Still working on it to see what happened.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:45 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Thank you Winston, you’re a gentleman and scholar in my book. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

144

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:42 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Ok. The point of the RA is to assist you in doing your job. So, I apologize if you were not informed, or it was not put in place for 
you. I am sure there is a simple solution to this. Something may have just fallen through the cracks. As soon as I hear something, 
I will reach out to you and let you know.  

-W 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:39 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

10-4 Winston, thank you. 
The specific RA would have assisted in my situation for the past few days if it is actually in place. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:36 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Ok. Let me see if I can figure out what is going on. Bear with me. I will get back to you as soon as I can.  

145

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:34 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

I noticed that Ms. McAllister did approve an annual leave request yesterday but that is all I see anywhere. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 6:38 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Mr. Meindl, 

I was under the impression your SOR was granted. Please contact your SOR for clarification.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 5:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   

146

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

147

 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Brathwaite, Winston
Thursday, December 13, 2018 12:16 PM
Meindl, Max
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

It looks like your SOR is in the process of reviewing the documentation again to make a final decision.   

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 12:51 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Winston, 
Any update or is everything still unclear? 

Regards, 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:04 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Thanks Max. If I knew you were unaware I would have acted sooner. I really thought you had been informed this was granted. 
Still working on it to see what happened.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:45 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Thank you Winston, you’re a gentleman and scholar in my book. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 

148

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:42 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Ok. The point of the RA is to assist you in doing your job. So, I apologize if you were not informed, or it was not put in place for 
you. I am sure there is a simple solution to this. Something may have just fallen through the cracks. As soon as I hear something, 
I will reach out to you and let you know.  

-W 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:39 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

10-4 Winston, thank you. 
The specific RA would have assisted in my situation for the past few days if it is actually in place. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:36 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

149

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ok. Let me see if I can figure out what is going on. Bear with me. I will get back to you as soon as I can.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:34 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

I noticed that Ms. McAllister did approve an annual leave request yesterday but that is all I see anywhere. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 6:38 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Mr. Meindl, 

I was under the impression your SOR was granted. Please contact your SOR for clarification.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 5:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   

150

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

151

 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

10-4, thanks. 

Meindl, Max
Thursday, December 13, 2018 3:32 PM
Brathwaite, Winston
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 12:16 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

It looks like your SOR is in the process of reviewing the documentation again to make a final decision.   

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 12:51 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Winston, 
Any update or is everything still unclear? 

Regards, 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

152

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:04 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Thanks Max. If I knew you were unaware I would have acted sooner. I really thought you had been informed this was granted. 
Still working on it to see what happened.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:45 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Thank you Winston, you’re a gentleman and scholar in my book. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:42 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Ok. The point of the RA is to assist you in doing your job. So, I apologize if you were not informed, or it was not put in place for 
you. I am sure there is a simple solution to this. Something may have just fallen through the cracks. As soon as I hear something, 
I will reach out to you and let you know.  

-W 

153

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:39 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

10-4 Winston, thank you. 
The specific RA would have assisted in my situation for the past few days if it is actually in place. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:36 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Ok. Let me see if I can figure out what is going on. Bear with me. I will get back to you as soon as I can.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:34 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

I noticed that Ms. McAllister did approve an annual leave request yesterday but that is all I see anywhere. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

154

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 6:38 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Mr. Meindl, 

I was under the impression your SOR was granted. Please contact your SOR for clarification.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 5:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

155

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
156

 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Good morning Mr. Meindl: 

Brathwaite, Winston
Friday, December 14, 2018 9:36 AM
Meindl, Max
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

Just wanted to follow up with you and let you know that I reached out to your SOR, Jamie McAllister this morning and left a 
voicemail. To the best of my knowledge Jamie is currently working on your RA.  

Respectfully,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 4:32 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

10-4, thanks. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 12:16 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

It looks like your SOR is in the process of reviewing the documentation again to make a final decision.   

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 12:51 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Winston, 
Any update or is everything still unclear? 

157

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regards, 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:04 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Thanks Max. If I knew you were unaware I would have acted sooner. I really thought you had been informed this was granted. 
Still working on it to see what happened.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:45 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Thank you Winston, you’re a gentleman and scholar in my book. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:42 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

158

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ok. The point of the RA is to assist you in doing your job. So, I apologize if you were not informed, or it was not put in place for 
you. I am sure there is a simple solution to this. Something may have just fallen through the cracks. As soon as I hear something, 
I will reach out to you and let you know.  

-W 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:39 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

10-4 Winston, thank you. 
The specific RA would have assisted in my situation for the past few days if it is actually in place. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:36 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Ok. Let me see if I can figure out what is going on. Bear with me. I will get back to you as soon as I can.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:34 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

I noticed that Ms. McAllister did approve an annual leave request yesterday but that is all I see anywhere. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

159

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 6:38 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Mr. Meindl, 

I was under the impression your SOR was granted. Please contact your SOR for clarification.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 5:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 

160

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

161

 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Friday, December 14, 2018 1:17 PM
Brathwaite, Winston
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

10-4 Winston, appreciate the update. 
A box checked yes would pretty quick to do so  
I’m guessing a reason to deny would take a bit longer. 
All conjecture I admit, but no other way to look at it, in my opinion, 

Have a great day! 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Friday, December 14, 2018 9:36 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Good morning Mr. Meindl: 

Just wanted to follow up with you and let you know that I reached out to your SOR, Jamie McAllister this morning and left a 
voicemail. To the best of my knowledge Jamie is currently working on your RA.  

Respectfully,  
Winston 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 4:32 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

10-4, thanks. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 

162

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 12:16 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

It looks like your SOR is in the process of reviewing the documentation again to make a final decision.   

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 12:51 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Winston, 
Any update or is everything still unclear? 

Regards, 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:04 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Thanks Max. If I knew you were unaware I would have acted sooner. I really thought you had been informed this was granted. 
Still working on it to see what happened.  

163

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:45 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Thank you Winston, you’re a gentleman and scholar in my book. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:42 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Ok. The point of the RA is to assist you in doing your job. So, I apologize if you were not informed, or it was not put in place for 
you. I am sure there is a simple solution to this. Something may have just fallen through the cracks. As soon as I hear something, 
I will reach out to you and let you know.  

-W 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:39 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

10-4 Winston, thank you. 
The specific RA would have assisted in my situation for the past few days if it is actually in place. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

164

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 9:36 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Ok. Let me see if I can figure out what is going on. Bear with me. I will get back to you as soon as I can.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 10:34 AM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

I noticed that Ms. McAllister did approve an annual leave request yesterday but that is all I see anywhere. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Brathwaite, Winston  
Sent: Thursday, December 13, 2018 6:38 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Mr. Meindl, 

I was under the impression your SOR was granted. Please contact your SOR for clarification.  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 5:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 

165

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

166

 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Max, 

I apologize for the delay. 

McAllister, Jamie
Friday, December 14, 2018 2:02 PM
Meindl, Max
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

I submitted the response and you should be receiving it shortly from Winston. Please do not hesitate to reach out to me to 
discuss once you get it.  

Jamie McAllister 
Deputy Infrastructure Branch Director  
DR 4332 TX JFO Austin 
Region 6 Infrastructure Branch 
DHS/FEMA 
(202) 709-0851 Cell 
jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 4:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 

167

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

168

 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Friday, December 14, 2018 2:14 PM
Brathwaite, Winston
FW: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

Well Winston, I received the email below from Jamie and apparently she sent the information to you and not to me but I guessing 
that it was a denial or a qualified denial. 
Looking forward to hearing from you soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: McAllister, Jamie  
Sent: Friday, December 14, 2018 2:02 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Max, 

I apologize for the delay. 

I submitted the response and you should be receiving it shortly from Winston. Please do not hesitate to reach out to me to 
discuss once you get it.  

Jamie McAllister 
Deputy Infrastructure Branch Director  
DR 4332 TX JFO Austin 
Region 6 Infrastructure Branch 
DHS/FEMA 
(202) 709-0851 Cell 
jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 4:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 

169

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

170

 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Friday, December 14, 2018 2:29 PM
femamax@gmail.com
RA
Reasonable Accomodation-FEMA Form 256-0-1-08232018.pdf; Request for Work Schedule FEMA Form 106-1-1-1 (002).pdf; RA 
INFORMATION SHEET-Vista-Meindl.doc; Dr. Gay.pdf; 123-9-0-1.pdf; 1430_1.pdf; fema_manual_1430_1
_reasonable_accommodations.pdf; FM 123-9-1.pdf; MEDICAL TELEWORK REQUIREMENTS FORM.pdf; OPM telework agency2a-
guide.pdf; TELEWORK REQUEST FOR 07242018-PLUS 4 HOURS SICK DAY.pdf; WH-382.pdf; WH-381.pdf; WH-380-E-1.pdf; 
wh-380-e.pdf; 123-9-0-1.pdf; TELEWORK REQUEST FOR 07242018-PLUS 4 HOURS SICK DAY.pdf; fema_manual_1430_1
_reasonable_accommodations.pdf

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

171

 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:

Subject:

Meindl, Max
Tuesday, February 12, 2019 1:49 PM
Brathwaite, Winston; Johnson, Jo Linda; Peterkin, Donna
FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation; Fernandez, Luz; Maddox Britt, Sandra; Oke, Nicole; Goudy, Douglas; Henri, Foudiya; Avery, 
Darlene
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

To whom it may concern, 
Feb 12th 2019 
On or about August 27th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly SIX (6) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy governing 
this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 4:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

172

 
 
 
 
To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

173

 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Peterkin, Donna
Tuesday, February 12, 2019 1:50 PM
Meindl, Max
Automatic reply: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

Thank you for your email.  I am out of the office on leave.   

If you have an urgent Reasonable Accommodation matter, please contact Winston Braithwaite at 
Winston.Braithwaite@fema.dhs.gov.    

Please see the following OER points of contact:  

Reasonable Accommdattion - FEMA-Reasonable-Accomodation@fema.dhs.gov  
Anti-Harassement Unit - FEMA.Harassment@fema.dhs.gov  

174

 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Dear Mr. Meindl, 

Oke, Nicole
Tuesday, February 12, 2019 2:22 PM
Meindl, Max; Brathwaite, Winston; Johnson, Jo Linda; Peterkin, Donna
FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation; Fernandez, Luz; Maddox Britt, Sandra; Goudy, Douglas; Henri, Foudiya; Avery, Darlene
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

I will research the matter and circle back with a response and next steps.   

Respectfully, 

Nicole  

Nicole Oke 
Informal Unit Chief, Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/Federal Emergency Management Agency 
500 C Street, SW  Room 4SW-0915 
Washington, DC 20472-3505 
Cell: 202.717.1595 
E-mail: nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING:  This document and attachments are for official use only.  It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information.  This information 
shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee without prior authorization of the originator.  This communication along 
with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and 
legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability with civil and criminal 
penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or 
otherwise use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, February 12, 2019 2:49 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Johnson, Jo Linda <jolinda.johnson@fema.dhs.gov>; Peterkin, 
Donna <donna.peterkin@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas <Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; 
Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
Feb 12th 2019 
On or about August 27th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   

175

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
When considering that nearly SIX (6) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy governing 
this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 4:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 

176

 
 
 
 
 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

177

 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Brathwaite, Winston
Tuesday, February 12, 2019 2:43 PM
Oke, Nicole; Meindl, Max; Johnson, Jo Linda; Peterkin, Donna
FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation; Fernandez, Luz; Maddox Britt, Sandra; Goudy, Douglas; Henri, Foudiya; Avery, Darlene
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

Hi Nicole. I was awaiting language from Mr. Meindle’s cadre management to justify their denial of his request. I received that 
language and have been working on a draft response yesterday and today. I hope to have a draft completed by the end of this 
week.  

Respectfully,  
Winston 

From: Oke, Nicole  
Sent: Tuesday, February 12, 2019 3:22 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>; Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Johnson, Jo Linda 
<jolinda.johnson@fema.dhs.gov>; Peterkin, Donna <donna.peterkin@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Dear Mr. Meindl, 

I will research the matter and circle back with a response and next steps.   

Respectfully, 

Nicole  

Nicole Oke 
Informal Unit Chief, Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/Federal Emergency Management Agency 
500 C Street, SW  Room 4SW-0915 
Washington, DC 20472-3505 
Cell: 202.717.1595 
E-mail: nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING:  This document and attachments are for official use only.  It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information.  This information 
shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee without prior authorization of the originator.  This communication along 
with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and 
legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability with civil and criminal 
penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or 
otherwise use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

178

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, February 12, 2019 2:49 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Johnson, Jo Linda <jolinda.johnson@fema.dhs.gov>; Peterkin, 
Donna <donna.peterkin@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas <Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; 
Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
Feb 12th 2019 
On or about August 27th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly SIX (6) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy governing 
this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 4:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 

179

 
 
 
 
 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

180

 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:

Subject:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, February 27, 2019 4:00 PM
Oke, Nicole; Brathwaite, Winston; Johnson, Jo Linda; Peterkin, Donna
FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation; Fernandez, Luz; Maddox Britt, Sandra; Goudy, Douglas; Henri, Foudiya; Avery, Darlene; 
TERRY, DETRA S.; 'rick@guerradays.com'; Slie, Brian; McAllister, Jamie
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

Nicole, 
As of this date I’ve yet to receive an answer to my RA request filed in August of 2018.   
I am at a loss trying to understand how FEMA/DHS policy can be so blatantly ignored/violated in such a casual manner by so many. 
My request was based on a serious heart condition requiring a bit of flexibility in my morning schedule to accommodate issues I 
face daily.   
My heart surgery, which was scheduled for 01/25/2019, had to be postponed/rescheduled for a different time, but I am hoping it 
will be soon.   
My simple request to FEMA/DHS was for some understanding and flexibility to assist me over the past 6 months, in a challenging 
time, and the FEMA team, thus far, has deemed me insignificant and not worthy of a response nor consideration of assistance. 
Can you explain this? 

NOTE: Equal Rights Office policy requires the agency to provide requested Reasonable Accommodation within 10 days, barring 
extenuating circumstances. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Oke, Nicole  
Sent: Tuesday, February 12, 2019 2:22 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>; Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Johnson, Jo Linda 
<jolinda.johnson@fema.dhs.gov>; Peterkin, Donna <donna.peterkin@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Dear Mr. Meindl, 

I will research the matter and circle back with a response and next steps.   

Respectfully, 

181

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nicole  

Nicole Oke 
Informal Unit Chief, Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/Federal Emergency Management Agency 
500 C Street, SW  Room 4SW-0915 
Washington, DC 20472-3505 
Cell: 202.717.1595 
E-mail: nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING:  This document and attachments are for official use only.  It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information.  This information 
shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee without prior authorization of the originator.  This communication along 
with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and 
legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability with civil and criminal 
penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or 
otherwise use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, February 12, 2019 2:49 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Johnson, Jo Linda <jolinda.johnson@fema.dhs.gov>; Peterkin, 
Donna <donna.peterkin@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas <Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; 
Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
Feb 12th 2019 
On or about August 27th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly SIX (6) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy governing 
this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 

182

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 4:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

183

 
 
 
 
information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

184

 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Johnson, Jo Linda
Wednesday, February 27, 2019 4:01 PM
Meindl, Max
Automatic reply: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

Thank you for your email.  I am TDY the week of February 25. I will return to the office March 4, 2019.  I will 
check email periodically.  Thank you for your patience with any delay in responding. 

Jo Linda Johnson 
Director 
Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/FEMA 

185

 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Goudy, Douglas
Wednesday, February 27, 2019 4:01 PM
Meindl, Max
Automatic reply: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

I will be out of the office  from February 22-March 1, 2019 attending training and have limited email access, if you require immediate assistance please 
contact Nicole Oke, Informal Unit Lead at ext. (202) 717-1595.     

186

 
      
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Dear Mr. Meindl, 

Oke, Nicole
Monday, March 4, 2019 5:57 AM
Meindl, Max
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

I apologize for the delay.  You should have a response by close of business this week. 

Respectfully, 

Nicole  

Nicole Oke 
Informal Unit Chief, Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/Federal Emergency Management Agency 
500 C Street, SW  Room 4SW-0915 
Washington, DC 20472-3505 
Cell: 202.717.1595 
E-mail: nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING:  This document and attachments are for official use only.  It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information.  This information 
shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee without prior authorization of the originator.  This communication along 
with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and 
legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability with civil and criminal 
penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or 
otherwise use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, February 27, 2019 5:00 PM 
To: Oke, Nicole <nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Johnson, Jo Linda 
<jolinda.johnson@fema.dhs.gov>; Peterkin, Donna <donna.peterkin@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov>; rick@guerradays.com; Slie, Brian <Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie 
<jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Nicole, 
As of this date I’ve yet to receive an answer to my RA request filed in August of 2018.   
I am at a loss trying to understand how FEMA/DHS policy can be so blatantly ignored/violated in such a casual manner by so many. 
My request was based on a serious heart condition requiring a bit of flexibility in my morning schedule to accommodate issues I 
face daily.   

187

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
My heart surgery, which was scheduled for 01/25/2019, had to be postponed/rescheduled for a different time, but I am hoping it 
will be soon.   
My simple request to FEMA/DHS was for some understanding and flexibility to assist me over the past 6 months, in a challenging 
time, and the FEMA team, thus far, has deemed me insignificant and not worthy of a response nor consideration of assistance. 
Can you explain this? 

NOTE: Equal Rights Office policy requires the agency to provide requested Reasonable Accommodation within 10 days, barring 
extenuating circumstances. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Oke, Nicole  
Sent: Tuesday, February 12, 2019 2:22 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>; Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Johnson, Jo Linda 
<jolinda.johnson@fema.dhs.gov>; Peterkin, Donna <donna.peterkin@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Dear Mr. Meindl, 

I will research the matter and circle back with a response and next steps.   

Respectfully, 

Nicole  

Nicole Oke 
Informal Unit Chief, Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/Federal Emergency Management Agency 
500 C Street, SW  Room 4SW-0915 
Washington, DC 20472-3505 
Cell: 202.717.1595 
E-mail: nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov 

188

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
WARNING:  This document and attachments are for official use only.  It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information.  This information 
shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee without prior authorization of the originator.  This communication along 
with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and 
legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability with civil and criminal 
penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or 
otherwise use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, February 12, 2019 2:49 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Johnson, Jo Linda <jolinda.johnson@fema.dhs.gov>; Peterkin, 
Donna <donna.peterkin@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas <Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; 
Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
Feb 12th 2019 
On or about August 27th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly SIX (6) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy governing 
this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

189

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 4:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

190

 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, March 6, 2019 1:45 PM
Oke, Nicole
femamax@gmail.com
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

Nicole, 
Why is the RA process so ignored/abused by the process? 
I’ve done everything required on my end yet the “institution” can’t seem to take the request seriously nor process the request 
pursuant to DHS/FEMA policy. 
This seems unjust, unfair and unreasonable to an individual requesting/requiring a timely response to a request. 
Instead of a reasonable accommodation, so I can be allowed to do a couple of hours of telework before driving 60 miles to the 
office, I am required to take “leave without pay” on a regular basis resulting in a diminished paycheck.   
All in all, it seems as if the default position of DHS/FEMA is to stall and/or decline any request, for whatever reason. 
I would expect or request that the process, mine specifically, be looked in to, and to identify process disconnects and put eyes on 
a way to improve the process, especially the timeliness requirements or lack thereof 
According to policy: 
FEMA Manual 1430.1 Chg.1 December 3, 2002 
4-4 
Chapter 5 
Time Frames 
5-1. Processing Requests. FEMA will process requests for reasonable accommodation and provide accommodations, where they are appropriate, 
in as short a time frame as reasonably possible. FEMA recognizes, however, that the time necessary to process a request will depend on the 
nature of the accommodation requested and whether it is necessary to obtain supporting information. Time frames for processing requests and 
providing reasonable accommodation where no supporting information is required are as follows: 
a. Requests from applicants for employment should be expedited when necessary to ensure the applicant’s ability to compete for the position. 
However, these requests should not exceed ten (10) business days. 
b. If a request from an employee is processed by the supervisor, the request should be processed, and the accommodation, if granted, provided 
within 15 business days from the date of receipt of the request. Requests for accommodation should be expedited when the accommodation is 
needed to enable the employee to participate in an Agency activity scheduled to occur in the near future. 
(1) If the decision maker believes that it is necessary to obtain medical information to determine whether the requesting individual has a 
disability and/or to identify the functional limitations, the decision maker will request the information as soon as possible after his or her receipt 
of the request for accommodation. FEMA recognizes that the need for documentation may not become apparent until after the interactive 
process has begun. 
(2) In cases where medical documentation is needed, the accommodation, if granted, will be provided within ten (10) business days for an 
applicant, and within 15 business days for an employee, from the date the decision maker receives the relevant information, absent any 
extenuating circumstances. 
c. Where the Disability Program Manager is the decision maker on a request for reasonable accommodation, he/she will make a decision on the 
request and the  accommodation, if granted, will be provided within 15 business days from the date of the request. If medical documentation is 
necessary, the decision will be made within 15 business days of receipt of the medical information, absent any extenuating circumstances. 

We are going on 132 business days since AUGUST 23rd 2018 and 196 calendar days. 
Unreasonable and unnecessary. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

191

 
 
information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Oke, Nicole  
Sent: Monday, March 4, 2019 5:57 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Dear Mr. Meindl, 

I apologize for the delay.  You should have a response by close of business this week. 

Respectfully, 

Nicole  

Nicole Oke 
Informal Unit Chief, Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/Federal Emergency Management Agency 
500 C Street, SW  Room 4SW-0915 
Washington, DC 20472-3505 
Cell: 202.717.1595 
E-mail: nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING:  This document and attachments are for official use only.  It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information.  This information 
shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee without prior authorization of the originator.  This communication along 
with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and 
legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability with civil and criminal 
penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or 
otherwise use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, February 27, 2019 5:00 PM 
To: Oke, Nicole <nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Johnson, Jo Linda 
<jolinda.johnson@fema.dhs.gov>; Peterkin, Donna <donna.peterkin@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov>; rick@guerradays.com; Slie, Brian <Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie 

192

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Nicole, 
As of this date I’ve yet to receive an answer to my RA request filed in August of 2018.   
I am at a loss trying to understand how FEMA/DHS policy can be so blatantly ignored/violated in such a casual manner by so many. 
My request was based on a serious heart condition requiring a bit of flexibility in my morning schedule to accommodate issues I 
face daily.   
My heart surgery, which was scheduled for 01/25/2019, had to be postponed/rescheduled for a different time, but I am hoping it 
will be soon.   
My simple request to FEMA/DHS was for some understanding and flexibility to assist me over the past 6 months, in a challenging 
time, and the FEMA team, thus far, has deemed me insignificant and not worthy of a response nor consideration of assistance. 
Can you explain this? 

NOTE: Equal Rights Office policy requires the agency to provide requested Reasonable Accommodation within 10 days, barring 
extenuating circumstances. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Oke, Nicole  
Sent: Tuesday, February 12, 2019 2:22 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>; Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Johnson, Jo Linda 
<jolinda.johnson@fema.dhs.gov>; Peterkin, Donna <donna.peterkin@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Dear Mr. Meindl, 

I will research the matter and circle back with a response and next steps.   

Respectfully, 

Nicole  

Nicole Oke 
Informal Unit Chief, Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/Federal Emergency Management Agency 
500 C Street, SW  Room 4SW-0915 

193

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Washington, DC 20472-3505 
Cell: 202.717.1595 
E-mail: nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING:  This document and attachments are for official use only.  It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information.  This information 
shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee without prior authorization of the originator.  This communication along 
with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and 
legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability with civil and criminal 
penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or 
otherwise use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, February 12, 2019 2:49 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Johnson, Jo Linda <jolinda.johnson@fema.dhs.gov>; Peterkin, 
Donna <donna.peterkin@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas <Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; 
Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
Feb 12th 2019 
On or about August 27th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly SIX (6) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy governing 
this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

194

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 4:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

195

 
 
 
 
 
196

 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Mr. Meindl, 

Oke, Nicole
Wednesday, March 6, 2019 1:48 PM
Meindl, Max
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

I am in training today.  Let’s talk tomorrow.  Did you request fulltime telework?   

Thanks, 

Nicole  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, March 6, 2019 2:45 PM 
To: Oke, Nicole <nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: femamax@gmail.com 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Nicole, 
Why is the RA process so ignored/abused by the process? 
I’ve done everything required on my end yet the “institution” can’t seem to take the request seriously nor process the request 
pursuant to DHS/FEMA policy. 
This seems unjust, unfair and unreasonable to an individual requesting/requiring a timely response to a request. 
Instead of a reasonable accommodation, so I can be allowed to do a couple of hours of telework before driving 60 miles to the 
office, I am required to take “leave without pay” on a regular basis resulting in a diminished paycheck.   
All in all, it seems as if the default position of DHS/FEMA is to stall and/or decline any request, for whatever reason. 
I would expect or request that the process, mine specifically, be looked in to, and to identify process disconnects and put eyes on 
a way to improve the process, especially the timeliness requirements or lack thereof 
According to policy: 
FEMA Manual 1430.1 Chg.1 December 3, 2002 
4-4 
Chapter 5 
Time Frames 
5-1. Processing Requests. FEMA will process requests for reasonable accommodation and provide accommodations, where they are appropriate, 
in as short a time frame as reasonably possible. FEMA recognizes, however, that the time necessary to process a request will depend on the 
nature of the accommodation requested and whether it is necessary to obtain supporting information. Time frames for processing requests and 
providing reasonable accommodation where no supporting information is required are as follows: 
a. Requests from applicants for employment should be expedited when necessary to ensure the applicant’s ability to compete for the position. 
However, these requests should not exceed ten (10) business days. 
b. If a request from an employee is processed by the supervisor, the request should be processed, and the accommodation, if granted, provided 
within 15 business days from the date of receipt of the request. Requests for accommodation should be expedited when the accommodation is 
needed to enable the employee to participate in an Agency activity scheduled to occur in the near future. 
(1) If the decision maker believes that it is necessary to obtain medical information to determine whether the requesting individual has a 
disability and/or to identify the functional limitations, the decision maker will request the information as soon as possible after his or her receipt 
of the request for accommodation. FEMA recognizes that the need for documentation may not become apparent until after the interactive 
process has begun. 
(2) In cases where medical documentation is needed, the accommodation, if granted, will be provided within ten (10) business days for an 
applicant, and within 15 business days for an employee, from the date the decision maker receives the relevant information, absent any 
extenuating circumstances. 
c. Where the Disability Program Manager is the decision maker on a request for reasonable accommodation, he/she will make a decision on the 
request and the  accommodation, if granted, will be provided within 15 business days from the date of the request. If medical documentation is 
necessary, the decision will be made within 15 business days of receipt of the medical information, absent any extenuating circumstances. 

We are going on 132 business days since AUGUST 23rd 2018 and 196 calendar days. 

197

 
 
 
 
 
 
Unreasonable and unnecessary. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Oke, Nicole  
Sent: Monday, March 4, 2019 5:57 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Dear Mr. Meindl, 

I apologize for the delay.  You should have a response by close of business this week. 

Respectfully, 

Nicole  

Nicole Oke 
Informal Unit Chief, Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/Federal Emergency Management Agency 
500 C Street, SW  Room 4SW-0915 
Washington, DC 20472-3505 
Cell: 202.717.1595 
E-mail: nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING:  This document and attachments are for official use only.  It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information.  This information 
shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee without prior authorization of the originator.  This communication along 
with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and 
legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability with civil and criminal 
penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or 
otherwise use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

198

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, February 27, 2019 5:00 PM 
To: Oke, Nicole <nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Johnson, Jo Linda 
<jolinda.johnson@fema.dhs.gov>; Peterkin, Donna <donna.peterkin@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov>; rick@guerradays.com; Slie, Brian <Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie 
<jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Nicole, 
As of this date I’ve yet to receive an answer to my RA request filed in August of 2018.   
I am at a loss trying to understand how FEMA/DHS policy can be so blatantly ignored/violated in such a casual manner by so many. 
My request was based on a serious heart condition requiring a bit of flexibility in my morning schedule to accommodate issues I 
face daily.   
My heart surgery, which was scheduled for 01/25/2019, had to be postponed/rescheduled for a different time, but I am hoping it 
will be soon.   
My simple request to FEMA/DHS was for some understanding and flexibility to assist me over the past 6 months, in a challenging 
time, and the FEMA team, thus far, has deemed me insignificant and not worthy of a response nor consideration of assistance. 
Can you explain this? 

NOTE: Equal Rights Office policy requires the agency to provide requested Reasonable Accommodation within 10 days, barring 
extenuating circumstances. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Oke, Nicole  
Sent: Tuesday, February 12, 2019 2:22 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>; Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Johnson, Jo Linda 
<jolinda.johnson@fema.dhs.gov>; Peterkin, Donna <donna.peterkin@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Dear Mr. Meindl, 

I will research the matter and circle back with a response and next steps.   

199

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Respectfully, 

Nicole  

Nicole Oke 
Informal Unit Chief, Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/Federal Emergency Management Agency 
500 C Street, SW  Room 4SW-0915 
Washington, DC 20472-3505 
Cell: 202.717.1595 
E-mail: nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING:  This document and attachments are for official use only.  It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information.  This information 
shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee without prior authorization of the originator.  This communication along 
with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and 
legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability with civil and criminal 
penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or 
otherwise use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, February 12, 2019 2:49 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Johnson, Jo Linda <jolinda.johnson@fema.dhs.gov>; Peterkin, 
Donna <donna.peterkin@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas <Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; 
Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
Feb 12th 2019 
On or about August 27th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly SIX (6) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy governing 
this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

200

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 4:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

201

 
 
 
 
information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

202

 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Ms. Johnson, 

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, March 6, 2019 1:52 PM
Johnson, Jo Linda
femamax@gmail.com
FW: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

As of this date I’ve yet to receive an answer to my RA request filed in August of 2018.   
I am at a loss trying to understand how FEMA/DHS policy can be so blatantly ignored/violated in such a casual manner by so many. 
My request was based on a serious heart condition requiring a bit of flexibility in my morning schedule to accommodate issues I 
face daily.   
My heart surgery, which was scheduled for 01/25/2019, had to be postponed/rescheduled for a different time, but I am hoping it 
will be soon.   
My simple request to FEMA/DHS was for some understanding and flexibility to assist me over the past 6 months, in a challenging 
time, and the FEMA team, thus far, has deemed me insignificant and not worthy of a response nor consideration of assistance. 
Can you explain this? 
Why is the RA process so ignored/abused by the process? 
I’ve done everything required on my end yet the “institution” can’t seem to take the request seriously nor process the request 
pursuant to DHS/FEMA policy. 
This seems unjust, unfair and unreasonable to an individual requesting/requiring a timely response to a request. 
Instead of a reasonable accommodation, so I can be allowed to do a couple of hours of telework before driving 60 miles to the 
office, I am required to take “leave without pay” on a regular basis resulting in a diminished paycheck.   
All in all, it seems as if the default position of DHS/FEMA is to stall and/or decline any request, for whatever reason. 
I would expect or request that the process, mine specifically, be looked in to, and to identify process disconnects and put eyes on 
a way to improve the process, especially the timeliness requirements or lack thereof 
According to policy: 
FEMA Manual 1430.1 Chg.1 December 3, 2002 
4-4 
Chapter 5 
Time Frames 
5-1. Processing Requests. FEMA will process requests for reasonable accommodation and provide accommodations, where they are appropriate, 
in as short a time frame as reasonably possible. FEMA recognizes, however, that the time necessary to process a request will depend on the 
nature of the accommodation requested and whether it is necessary to obtain supporting information. Time frames for processing requests and 
providing reasonable accommodation where no supporting information is required are as follows: 
a. Requests from applicants for employment should be expedited when necessary to ensure the applicant’s ability to compete for the position. 
However, these requests should not exceed ten (10) business days. 
b. If a request from an employee is processed by the supervisor, the request should be processed, and the accommodation, if granted, provided 
within 15 business days from the date of receipt of the request. Requests for accommodation should be expedited when the accommodation is 
needed to enable the employee to participate in an Agency activity scheduled to occur in the near future. 
(1) If the decision maker believes that it is necessary to obtain medical information to determine whether the requesting individual has a 
disability and/or to identify the functional limitations, the decision maker will request the information as soon as possible after his or her receipt 
of the request for accommodation. FEMA recognizes that the need for documentation may not become apparent until after the interactive 
process has begun. 
(2) In cases where medical documentation is needed, the accommodation, if granted, will be provided within ten (10) business days for an 
applicant, and within 15 business days for an employee, from the date the decision maker receives the relevant information, absent any 
extenuating circumstances. 
c. Where the Disability Program Manager is the decision maker on a request for reasonable accommodation, he/she will make a decision on the 
request and the  accommodation, if granted, will be provided within 15 business days from the date of the request. If medical documentation is 
necessary, the decision will be made within 15 business days of receipt of the medical information, absent any extenuating circumstances. 

We are going on 132 business days since AUGUST 23rd 2018 and 196 calendar days. 
Unreasonable and unnecessary. 

203

 
 
 
NOTE: Equal Rights Office policy requires the agency to provide requested Reasonable Accommodation within 10 days, barring 
extenuating circumstances. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Oke, Nicole  
Sent: Tuesday, February 12, 2019 2:22 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>; Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Johnson, Jo Linda 
<jolinda.johnson@fema.dhs.gov>; Peterkin, Donna <donna.peterkin@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Dear Mr. Meindl, 

I will research the matter and circle back with a response and next steps.   

Respectfully, 

Nicole  

Nicole Oke 
Informal Unit Chief, Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/Federal Emergency Management Agency 
500 C Street, SW  Room 4SW-0915 
Washington, DC 20472-3505 
Cell: 202.717.1595 
E-mail: nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING:  This document and attachments are for official use only.  It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information.  This information 
shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee without prior authorization of the originator.  This communication along 
with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and 
legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability with civil and criminal 
penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or 
otherwise use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

204

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, February 12, 2019 2:49 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Johnson, Jo Linda <jolinda.johnson@fema.dhs.gov>; Peterkin, 
Donna <donna.peterkin@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas <Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; 
Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
Feb 12th 2019 
On or about August 27th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly SIX (6) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy governing 
this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 4:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 

205

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

206

 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, March 6, 2019 2:00 PM
Oke, Nicole
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

No, I specifically requested “Tele-work option when not feeling well” which is typically a couple of hours in the mornings  until my 
heart levels out and/or quits threatening me, (that’s a joke), but depending on many variables, weather, ability to sleep, ability to 
lie down or not.  I need to sit and meditate or do breathing exercises, but for sure I’m not ready to get in a car and drive 60 miles 
in Houston traffic.  BUT, I am able to log in and answer emails, make telephone calls, work in Grants Manager on behalf of my 
applicants.  When all levels out, I get in the car and head to the office to finish my day.  I am a producer and take care of my 
applicants to the point of when management wanted to transfer an applicant to another PDMG they received a letter from the 
applicants congressman stipulating disagreement with that decision.  Lo and behold I was reassigned the applicant.  I do my job, I 
do it well and I was just wanting some accommodation. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Oke, Nicole  
Sent: Wednesday, March 6, 2019 1:48 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Mr. Meindl, 

I am in training today.  Let’s talk tomorrow.  Did you request fulltime telework?   

Thanks, 

Nicole  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, March 6, 2019 2:45 PM 
To: Oke, Nicole <nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: femamax@gmail.com 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Nicole, 
Why is the RA process so ignored/abused by the process? 

207

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I’ve done everything required on my end yet the “institution” can’t seem to take the request seriously nor process the request 
pursuant to DHS/FEMA policy. 
This seems unjust, unfair and unreasonable to an individual requesting/requiring a timely response to a request. 
Instead of a reasonable accommodation, so I can be allowed to do a couple of hours of telework before driving 60 miles to the 
office, I am required to take “leave without pay” on a regular basis resulting in a diminished paycheck.   
All in all, it seems as if the default position of DHS/FEMA is to stall and/or decline any request, for whatever reason. 
I would expect or request that the process, mine specifically, be looked in to, and to identify process disconnects and put eyes on 
a way to improve the process, especially the timeliness requirements or lack thereof 
According to policy: 
FEMA Manual 1430.1 Chg.1 December 3, 2002 
4-4 
Chapter 5 
Time Frames 
5-1. Processing Requests. FEMA will process requests for reasonable accommodation and provide accommodations, where they are appropriate, 
in as short a time frame as reasonably possible. FEMA recognizes, however, that the time necessary to process a request will depend on the 
nature of the accommodation requested and whether it is necessary to obtain supporting information. Time frames for processing requests and 
providing reasonable accommodation where no supporting information is required are as follows: 
a. Requests from applicants for employment should be expedited when necessary to ensure the applicant’s ability to compete for the position. 
However, these requests should not exceed ten (10) business days. 
b. If a request from an employee is processed by the supervisor, the request should be processed, and the accommodation, if granted, provided 
within 15 business days from the date of receipt of the request. Requests for accommodation should be expedited when the accommodation is 
needed to enable the employee to participate in an Agency activity scheduled to occur in the near future. 
(1) If the decision maker believes that it is necessary to obtain medical information to determine whether the requesting individual has a 
disability and/or to identify the functional limitations, the decision maker will request the information as soon as possible after his or her receipt 
of the request for accommodation. FEMA recognizes that the need for documentation may not become apparent until after the interactive 
process has begun. 
(2) In cases where medical documentation is needed, the accommodation, if granted, will be provided within ten (10) business days for an 
applicant, and within 15 business days for an employee, from the date the decision maker receives the relevant information, absent any 
extenuating circumstances. 
c. Where the Disability Program Manager is the decision maker on a request for reasonable accommodation, he/she will make a decision on the 
request and the  accommodation, if granted, will be provided within 15 business days from the date of the request. If medical documentation is 
necessary, the decision will be made within 15 business days of receipt of the medical information, absent any extenuating circumstances. 

We are going on 132 business days since AUGUST 23rd 2018 and 196 calendar days. 
Unreasonable and unnecessary. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Oke, Nicole  
Sent: Monday, March 4, 2019 5:57 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

208

 
 
 
 
Dear Mr. Meindl, 

I apologize for the delay.  You should have a response by close of business this week. 

Respectfully, 

Nicole  

Nicole Oke 
Informal Unit Chief, Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/Federal Emergency Management Agency 
500 C Street, SW  Room 4SW-0915 
Washington, DC 20472-3505 
Cell: 202.717.1595 
E-mail: nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING:  This document and attachments are for official use only.  It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information.  This information 
shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee without prior authorization of the originator.  This communication along 
with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and 
legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability with civil and criminal 
penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or 
otherwise use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, February 27, 2019 5:00 PM 
To: Oke, Nicole <nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Johnson, Jo Linda 
<jolinda.johnson@fema.dhs.gov>; Peterkin, Donna <donna.peterkin@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov>; rick@guerradays.com; Slie, Brian <Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie 
<jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Nicole, 
As of this date I’ve yet to receive an answer to my RA request filed in August of 2018.   
I am at a loss trying to understand how FEMA/DHS policy can be so blatantly ignored/violated in such a casual manner by so many. 
My request was based on a serious heart condition requiring a bit of flexibility in my morning schedule to accommodate issues I 
face daily.   
My heart surgery, which was scheduled for 01/25/2019, had to be postponed/rescheduled for a different time, but I am hoping it 
will be soon.   
My simple request to FEMA/DHS was for some understanding and flexibility to assist me over the past 6 months, in a challenging 
time, and the FEMA team, thus far, has deemed me insignificant and not worthy of a response nor consideration of assistance. 
Can you explain this? 

NOTE: Equal Rights Office policy requires the agency to provide requested Reasonable Accommodation within 10 days, barring 
extenuating circumstances. 

209

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Oke, Nicole  
Sent: Tuesday, February 12, 2019 2:22 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>; Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Johnson, Jo Linda 
<jolinda.johnson@fema.dhs.gov>; Peterkin, Donna <donna.peterkin@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Dear Mr. Meindl, 

I will research the matter and circle back with a response and next steps.   

Respectfully, 

Nicole  

Nicole Oke 
Informal Unit Chief, Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/Federal Emergency Management Agency 
500 C Street, SW  Room 4SW-0915 
Washington, DC 20472-3505 
Cell: 202.717.1595 
E-mail: nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING:  This document and attachments are for official use only.  It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information.  This information 
shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee without prior authorization of the originator.  This communication along 
with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and 
legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability with civil and criminal 
penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or 
otherwise use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

210

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, February 12, 2019 2:49 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Johnson, Jo Linda <jolinda.johnson@fema.dhs.gov>; Peterkin, 
Donna <donna.peterkin@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas <Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; 
Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
Feb 12th 2019 
On or about August 27th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly SIX (6) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy governing 
this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 4:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 

211

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

212

 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, March 6, 2019 2:03 PM
Oke, Nicole
RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request 

I had to submit my FMLA paperwork today, to cover all the bases, to deal with the RA nonactivity, again a penalty option, 
considering it is a no pay option. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Oke, Nicole  
Sent: Wednesday, March 6, 2019 1:48 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Mr. Meindl, 

I am in training today.  Let’s talk tomorrow.  Did you request fulltime telework?   

Thanks, 

Nicole  

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, March 6, 2019 2:45 PM 
To: Oke, Nicole <nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: femamax@gmail.com 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Nicole, 
Why is the RA process so ignored/abused by the process? 
I’ve done everything required on my end yet the “institution” can’t seem to take the request seriously nor process the request 
pursuant to DHS/FEMA policy. 
This seems unjust, unfair and unreasonable to an individual requesting/requiring a timely response to a request. 
Instead of a reasonable accommodation, so I can be allowed to do a couple of hours of telework before driving 60 miles to the 
office, I am required to take “leave without pay” on a regular basis resulting in a diminished paycheck.   
All in all, it seems as if the default position of DHS/FEMA is to stall and/or decline any request, for whatever reason. 

213

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I would expect or request that the process, mine specifically, be looked in to, and to identify process disconnects and put eyes on 
a way to improve the process, especially the timeliness requirements or lack thereof 
According to policy: 
FEMA Manual 1430.1 Chg.1 December 3, 2002 
4-4 
Chapter 5 
Time Frames 
5-1. Processing Requests. FEMA will process requests for reasonable accommodation and provide accommodations, where they are appropriate, 
in as short a time frame as reasonably possible. FEMA recognizes, however, that the time necessary to process a request will depend on the 
nature of the accommodation requested and whether it is necessary to obtain supporting information. Time frames for processing requests and 
providing reasonable accommodation where no supporting information is required are as follows: 
a. Requests from applicants for employment should be expedited when necessary to ensure the applicant’s ability to compete for the position. 
However, these requests should not exceed ten (10) business days. 
b. If a request from an employee is processed by the supervisor, the request should be processed, and the accommodation, if granted, provided 
within 15 business days from the date of receipt of the request. Requests for accommodation should be expedited when the accommodation is 
needed to enable the employee to participate in an Agency activity scheduled to occur in the near future. 
(1) If the decision maker believes that it is necessary to obtain medical information to determine whether the requesting individual has a 
disability and/or to identify the functional limitations, the decision maker will request the information as soon as possible after his or her receipt 
of the request for accommodation. FEMA recognizes that the need for documentation may not become apparent until after the interactive 
process has begun. 
(2) In cases where medical documentation is needed, the accommodation, if granted, will be provided within ten (10) business days for an 
applicant, and within 15 business days for an employee, from the date the decision maker receives the relevant information, absent any 
extenuating circumstances. 
c. Where the Disability Program Manager is the decision maker on a request for reasonable accommodation, he/she will make a decision on the 
request and the  accommodation, if granted, will be provided within 15 business days from the date of the request. If medical documentation is 
necessary, the decision will be made within 15 business days of receipt of the medical information, absent any extenuating circumstances. 

We are going on 132 business days since AUGUST 23rd 2018 and 196 calendar days. 
Unreasonable and unnecessary. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Oke, Nicole  
Sent: Monday, March 4, 2019 5:57 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Dear Mr. Meindl, 

I apologize for the delay.  You should have a response by close of business this week. 

Respectfully, 

214

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nicole  

Nicole Oke 
Informal Unit Chief, Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/Federal Emergency Management Agency 
500 C Street, SW  Room 4SW-0915 
Washington, DC 20472-3505 
Cell: 202.717.1595 
E-mail: nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING:  This document and attachments are for official use only.  It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information.  This information 
shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee without prior authorization of the originator.  This communication along 
with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and 
legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability with civil and criminal 
penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or 
otherwise use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, February 27, 2019 5:00 PM 
To: Oke, Nicole <nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Johnson, Jo Linda 
<jolinda.johnson@fema.dhs.gov>; Peterkin, Donna <donna.peterkin@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov>; rick@guerradays.com; Slie, Brian <Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie 
<jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Nicole, 
As of this date I’ve yet to receive an answer to my RA request filed in August of 2018.   
I am at a loss trying to understand how FEMA/DHS policy can be so blatantly ignored/violated in such a casual manner by so many. 
My request was based on a serious heart condition requiring a bit of flexibility in my morning schedule to accommodate issues I 
face daily.   
My heart surgery, which was scheduled for 01/25/2019, had to be postponed/rescheduled for a different time, but I am hoping it 
will be soon.   
My simple request to FEMA/DHS was for some understanding and flexibility to assist me over the past 6 months, in a challenging 
time, and the FEMA team, thus far, has deemed me insignificant and not worthy of a response nor consideration of assistance. 
Can you explain this? 

NOTE: Equal Rights Office policy requires the agency to provide requested Reasonable Accommodation within 10 days, barring 
extenuating circumstances. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 

215

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Oke, Nicole  
Sent: Tuesday, February 12, 2019 2:22 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>; Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Johnson, Jo Linda 
<jolinda.johnson@fema.dhs.gov>; Peterkin, Donna <donna.peterkin@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

Dear Mr. Meindl, 

I will research the matter and circle back with a response and next steps.   

Respectfully, 

Nicole  

Nicole Oke 
Informal Unit Chief, Office of Equal Rights 
DHS/Federal Emergency Management Agency 
500 C Street, SW  Room 4SW-0915 
Washington, DC 20472-3505 
Cell: 202.717.1595 
E-mail: nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov 

WARNING:  This document and attachments are for official use only.  It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to For Official Use Only (FOUO) information.  This information 
shall not be distributed beyond the original addressee without prior authorization of the originator.  This communication along 
with any attachments is covered by Federal and state laws governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and 
legally privileged information. Unauthorized disclosure of this information may result in personal liability with civil and criminal 
penalties. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient or has received it in error, do not disseminate copy or 
otherwise use the information. Please reply immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Tuesday, February 12, 2019 2:49 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; Johnson, Jo Linda <jolinda.johnson@fema.dhs.gov>; Peterkin, 

216

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Donna <donna.peterkin@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas <Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; 
Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 
Feb 12th 2019 
On or about August 27th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly SIX (6) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy governing 
this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, December 12, 2018 4:09 PM 
To: Brathwaite, Winston <winston.d.brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov>; McAllister, Jamie <jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov>; Slie, Brian 
<Brian.Slie@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: FEMA-Reasonable-Accommodation <fema-reasonable-accommodation@fema.dhs.gov>; Fernandez, Luz 
<Luz.Fernandez@fema.dhs.gov>; Maddox Britt, Sandra <sandra.maddox-britt@fema.dhs.gov>; Oke, Nicole 
<nicole.oke@fema.dhs.gov>; McPhie, Regina <Regina.McPhie@fema.dhs.gov>; Goudy, Douglas 
<Douglas.Goudy@fema.dhs.gov>; Henri, Foudiya <Foudiya.Henri@fema.dhs.gov>; Avery, Darlene <Darlene.Avery@hq.dhs.gov>; 
Merritt, Lisa <lisa.merritt@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request  

To whom it may concern, 

217

 
 
 
 
 
 
December 12th, 2018 
On or about August 23th, 2018, I submitted a Reasonable Accommodation (RA) request for consideration/processing.   
As of this date, I’ve received no answer, up or down, concerning my request.   
Although the RA request has passed through many hands/personnel from Washington D/C. to Houston to Austin, no one has seen 
it important enough to respond to my RA request.   
When considering that nearly four (4) months have passed since my initial RA request, it would be safe to say that policy 
governing this specific RA request has not been complied with.   
I am respectfully requesting that a response to my RA request be provided forthwith as required by FEMA policy.   
I am at a loss in trying to understand the lack of response, in a timely manner, as required by policy.   
Would someone, willing to take ownership, please respond to the RA on file since August 13th, 2018?   
All requested and required information has been provided per policy to Winston D. Brathwaite, J.D., Affirmative Employment 
Specialist | AEP/RA| DHS/FEMA/Office of Equal Rights | 500 C Street SW, 4SW-0809, Washington, DC 20472-3505 | Desk: 
202.212.4102| Mobile: 202.735.4449 | Fax: 202.646.4320 | Winston.D.Brathwaite@fema.dhs.gov , and if you have any questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
As a veteran and senior citizen with a documented disability in my files, it is incumbent upon someone to step forward and 
address this egregious oversight/situation soonest. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

218

 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:
Attachments:

Max, 

McAllister, Jamie
Friday, March 8, 2019 7:23 AM
Meindl, Max
Nguyen, Tam
RA Request Response
Meindl_1stLineDecisionFTTWRequest - Oke review (002) to JLJ.pdf

Please see response attached.  

Jamie McAllister 
Deputy Infrastructure Branch Director  
DR 4332 TX JFO Austin 
Region 6 Infrastructure Branch 
DHS/FEMA 
(202) 709-0851 Cell 
jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov 

219

 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

FYI, confidential 

Meindl, Max
Friday, March 8, 2019 10:47 AM
TERRY, DETRA S.
FW: RA Request Response
Meindl_1stLineDecisionFTTWRequest - Oke review (002) to JLJ.pdf

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed 
of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an 
authorized DHS official. 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may contain 

From: McAllister, Jamie  
Sent: Friday, March 8, 2019 7:23 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Nguyen, Tam <Tam.Nguyen@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RA Request Response 

Max, 

Please see response attached.  

Jamie McAllister 
Deputy Infrastructure Branch Director  
DR 4332 TX JFO Austin 
Region 6 Infrastructure Branch 
DHS/FEMA 
(202) 709-0851 Cell 
jamie.mcallister@fema.dhs.gov 

220

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, June 26, 2019 2:22 PM
femamax@gmail.com
FMLA
Electronic Code of Federal Regulations-PART 825—THE FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE 
ACT OF 1993.pdf

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

1

 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, June 26, 2019 2:06 PM
Alexander, Dennis
RE: WebTA

FYI: 
From: Gause, Jacqueline  
Sent: Tuesday, May 21, 2019 10:04 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: Reasonable accommodation  

Good morning Max,  

I believe a little while back you requested to work reduced hours due to medical restrictions. I have reached out to ERO to 
get more guidance on what employees can do in situations where a supervisor/leadership initially denies an alternative 
work schedule that was due to medical reason. If you still need or wish to pursue an alternate work schedule through the 
reasonable accommodation route you can reach out to ERO for more guidance.  

Charise Scott - 202-856-2114 
Tam Nguyen - 609-508-2673 

Regards,  

Jacqueline Gause, MSc 
Human Resources 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Department of Homeland Security 
Hurricane Harvey-DR4332-TX 
Texas Recovery Office  
Houston, TX 
Mobile: 202-322-6241 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 

2

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Alexander, Dennis  
Sent: Wednesday, June 26, 2019 1:53 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: WebTA 

FYI, maybe you know this, but FMLA is for a long term out of office, not for a few hours here or there. 

Thanks, 
Dennis 

Dennis J. Alexander, P.E. 
Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
Disaster DR4332 TX-- Harvey 
TRO TX Harris County Branch II 
8332 Willow Place Drive South 
Houston, TX 77070 
281-897-2017 Desk Phone 
737-230-8182 Cell Phone 
Dennis.alexander@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, June 26, 2019 1:47 PM 
To: Alexander, Dennis <dennis.alexander@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: WebTA 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

3

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Gause, Jacqueline  
Sent: Wednesday, May 29, 2019 9:56 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>; Atchison, Randy <Randy.Atchison@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: WebTA 

Good morning,  

FMLA does not carry any leave. FMLA allows an employee to take up to 480 hours of unpaid for a personal or family 
medical situation.  

Excerpt from OPM: 
Under the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (FMLA), most Federal employees are entitled to a total of up to 12 
workweeks of unpaid leave during any 12-month period. 

An employee may elect to substitute annual leave and/or sick leave, consistent with current laws and OPM's 
regulations for using annual and sick leave, for any unpaid leave under the FMLA.  

The employee can request FMLA LWOP, but will not receive any compensation. If the employee wishes to be paid while 
out on leave they will need to use their annual or sick leave with the FMLA code.  

If you have additional questions or need me to go into further detail please let me know.  

Regards,  

Jacqueline Gause, MSc 
Human Resources 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Department of Homeland Security 
Hurricane Harvey-DR4332-TX 
Texas Recovery Office  
Houston, TX 
Mobile: 202-322-6241 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Friday, May 24, 2019 9:39 AM 
To: Atchison, Randy <Randy.Atchison@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov>; Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: WebTA 

4

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Randy, 
My understanding is that with approved MFLA I am not required to use up my sick days or annual leave. 
I requested MFLA leave without pay which I have been doing for several weeks now. 
Please advise soonest. 

“Cannot take TWOP until all your leave has been used. Also please put the hours in the day block of the calendar. Thank You Randy Atchison” 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

5

 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, June 26, 2019 2:01 PM
Alexander, Dennis
RE: WebTA

6

  
§825.202   Intermittent leave or reduced leave schedule. 

(a) Definition. FMLA leave may be taken intermittently or on a reduced leave schedule under certain circumstances. 
Intermittent leave is FMLA leave taken in separate blocks of time due to a single qualifying reason. A reduced leave 
schedule is a leave schedule that reduces an employee's usual number of working hours per workweek, or hours per 
workday. A reduced leave schedule is a change in the employee's schedule for a period of time, normally from full-time 
to part-time. 

(b) Medical necessity. For intermittent leave or leave on a reduced leave schedule taken because of one's own serious 
health condition, to care for a spouse, parent, son, or daughter with a serious health condition, or to care for a covered 
servicemember with a serious injury or illness, there must be a medical need for leave and it must be that such medical 
need can be best accommodated through an intermittent or reduced leave schedule. The treatment regimen and other 
information described in the certification of a serious health condition and in the certification of a serious injury or 
illness, if required by the employer, addresses the medical necessity of intermittent leave or leave on a reduced leave 
schedule. See §§825.306, 825.310. Leave may be taken intermittently or on a reduced leave schedule when medically 
necessary for planned and/or unanticipated medical treatment of a serious health condition or of a covered 
servicemember's serious injury or illness, or for recovery from treatment or recovery from a serious health condition or 
a covered servicemember's serious injury or illness. It may also be taken to provide care or psychological comfort to a 
covered family member with a serious health condition or a covered servicemember with a serious injury or illness. 

(1) Intermittent leave may be taken for a serious health condition of a spouse, parent, son, or daughter, for the 
employee's own serious health condition, or a serious injury or illness of a covered servicemember which requires 
treatment by a health care provider periodically, rather than for one continuous period of time, and may include leave 
of periods from an hour or more to several weeks. Examples of intermittent leave would include leave taken on an 
occasional basis for medical appointments, or leave taken several days at a time spread over a period of six months, 
such as for chemotherapy. A pregnant employee may take leave intermittently for prenatal examinations or for her own 
condition, such as for periods of severe morning sickness. An example of an employee taking leave on a reduced leave 

7

 
 
schedule is an employee who is recovering from a serious health condition and is not strong enough to work a full-time 
schedule. 

(2) Intermittent or reduced schedule leave may be taken for absences where the employee or family member is 
incapacitated or unable to perform the essential functions of the position because of a chronic serious health condition 
or a serious injury or illness of a covered servicemember, even if he or she does not receive treatment by a health care 
provider. See §§825.113 and 825.127. 

(c) Birth or placement. When leave is taken after the birth of a healthy child or placement of a healthy child for adoption 
or foster care, an employee may take leave intermittently or on a reduced leave schedule only if the employer agrees. 
Such a schedule reduction might occur, for example, where an employee, with the employer's agreement, works part-
time after the birth of a child, or takes leave in several segments. The employer's agreement is not required, however, 
for leave during which the expectant mother has a serious health condition in connection with the birth of her child or if 
the newborn child has a serious health condition. See §825.204 for rules governing transfer to an alternative position 
that better accommodates intermittent leave. See also §825.120 (pregnancy) and §825.121 (adoption and foster care). 

(d) Qualifying exigency. Leave due to a qualifying exigency may be taken on an intermittent or reduced leave schedule 
basis. 

[78 FR 8902, Feb. 6, 2013, as amended at 80 FR 10001, Feb. 25, 2015] 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Alexander, Dennis  
Sent: Wednesday, June 26, 2019 1:53 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: WebTA 

FYI, maybe you know this, but FMLA is for a long term out of office, not for a few hours here or there. 

Thanks, 
Dennis 

8

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dennis J. Alexander, P.E. 
Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
Disaster DR4332 TX-- Harvey 
TRO TX Harris County Branch II 
8332 Willow Place Drive South 
Houston, TX 77070 
281-897-2017 Desk Phone 
737-230-8182 Cell Phone 
Dennis.alexander@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, June 26, 2019 1:47 PM 
To: Alexander, Dennis <dennis.alexander@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: WebTA 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Gause, Jacqueline  
Sent: Wednesday, May 29, 2019 9:56 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>; Atchison, Randy <Randy.Atchison@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: WebTA 

Good morning,  

FMLA does not carry any leave. FMLA allows an employee to take up to 480 hours of unpaid for a personal or family 
medical situation.  

9

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Excerpt from OPM: 
Under the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (FMLA), most Federal employees are entitled to a total of up to 12 
workweeks of unpaid leave during any 12-month period. 

An employee may elect to substitute annual leave and/or sick leave, consistent with current laws and OPM's 
regulations for using annual and sick leave, for any unpaid leave under the FMLA.  

The employee can request FMLA LWOP, but will not receive any compensation. If the employee wishes to be paid while 
out on leave they will need to use their annual or sick leave with the FMLA code.  

If you have additional questions or need me to go into further detail please let me know.  

Regards,  

Jacqueline Gause, MSc 
Human Resources 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Department of Homeland Security 
Hurricane Harvey-DR4332-TX 
Texas Recovery Office  
Houston, TX 
Mobile: 202-322-6241 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Friday, May 24, 2019 9:39 AM 
To: Atchison, Randy <Randy.Atchison@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov>; Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: WebTA 

Randy, 
My understanding is that with approved MFLA I am not required to use up my sick days or annual leave. 
I requested MFLA leave without pay which I have been doing for several weeks now. 
Please advise soonest. 

“Cannot take TWOP until all your leave has been used. Also please put the hours in the day block of the calendar. Thank You Randy Atchison” 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 

10

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

11

 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Meindl, Max
Wednesday, June 26, 2019 1:53 PM
Alexander, Dennis
RE: WebTA

It allows for reduced hours. 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Alexander, Dennis  
Sent: Wednesday, June 26, 2019 1:53 PM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: WebTA 

FYI, maybe you know this, but FMLA is for a long term out of office, not for a few hours here or there. 

Thanks, 
Dennis 

Dennis J. Alexander, P.E. 
Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
Disaster DR4332 TX-- Harvey 
TRO TX Harris County Branch II 
8332 Willow Place Drive South 
Houston, TX 77070 
281-897-2017 Desk Phone 
737-230-8182 Cell Phone 
Dennis.alexander@fema.dhs.gov 

12

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, June 26, 2019 1:47 PM 
To: Alexander, Dennis <dennis.alexander@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: WebTA 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

From: Gause, Jacqueline  
Sent: Wednesday, May 29, 2019 9:56 AM 
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>; Atchison, Randy <Randy.Atchison@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: RE: WebTA 

Good morning,  

FMLA does not carry any leave. FMLA allows an employee to take up to 480 hours of unpaid for a personal or family 
medical situation.  

Excerpt from OPM: 
Under the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (FMLA), most Federal employees are entitled to a total of up to 12 
workweeks of unpaid leave during any 12-month period. 

An employee may elect to substitute annual leave and/or sick leave, consistent with current laws and OPM's 
regulations for using annual and sick leave, for any unpaid leave under the FMLA.  

The employee can request FMLA LWOP, but will not receive any compensation. If the employee wishes to be paid while 
out on leave they will need to use their annual or sick leave with the FMLA code.  

If you have additional questions or need me to go into further detail please let me know.  

13

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regards,  

Jacqueline Gause, MSc 
Human Resources 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Department of Homeland Security 
Hurricane Harvey-DR4332-TX 
Texas Recovery Office  
Houston, TX 
Mobile: 202-322-6241 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Friday, May 24, 2019 9:39 AM 
To: Atchison, Randy <Randy.Atchison@fema.dhs.gov> 
Cc: Gause, Jacqueline <jacqueline.gause@fema.dhs.gov>; Terry, Detra <detra.terry@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: WebTA 

Randy, 
My understanding is that with approved MFLA I am not required to use up my sick days or annual leave. 
I requested MFLA leave without pay which I have been doing for several weeks now. 
Please advise soonest. 

“Cannot take TWOP until all your leave has been used. Also please put the hours in the day block of the calendar. Thank You Randy Atchison” 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

  WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA.  It may 
contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).  The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, 
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” 
without prior approval of an authorized DHS official. 

14

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meindl, Max

From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:

Alexander, Dennis
Wednesday, June 26, 2019 1:53 PM
Meindl, Max
RE: WebTA

FYI, maybe you know this, but FMLA is for a long term out of office, not for a few hours here or there. 

Thanks, 
Dennis 

Dennis J. Alexander, P.E. 
Public Assistance Group Supervisor 
Disaster DR4332 TX-- Harvey 
TRO TX Harris County Branch II 
8332 Willow Place Drive South 
Houston, TX 77070 
281-897-2017 Desk Phone 
737-230-8182 Cell Phone 
Dennis.alexander@fema.dhs.gov 

From: Meindl, Max  
Sent: Wednesday, June 26, 2019 1:47 PM 
To: Alexander, Dennis <dennis.alexander@fema.dhs.gov> 
Subject: FW: WebTA 

Max J Meindl, PMP 
Program Delivery Manager | Houston TRO 
DHS | FEMA-Recovery Directorate 
Public Assistance Division 
FEMA/HQ 
202-374-9426 
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov 

15

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
