U.S. Department of Homeland Security 
Washington, DC 20472 

Notice of EEO Complaint Process 

EEOC Counseling Process: Time Frames 





You, the aggrieved person, must contact an EEO counselor within 45 calendar days of 
the date:

o Of the matter alleged to be discriminatory.
o Effective date of an alleged discriminatory personnel action.

You must be given a Notice of Right to File a Formal Complaint no later than:

o 30 calendar days after you first request EEO counseling. The period may be 
extended if you agree to an extension of no more than an additional 60 
calendar days.

o 90 calendar days after request EEO counseling if you agree to use the agency’s 

alternative dispute resolution (ADR) procedures.

Matters Which May Be Raise in Formal Complaint 

If your allegations of discrimination are not resolved during counseling and you file and formal 
complaint, you may include only matters: 

 Raised during the counseling


Like or related to matters raised during counseling

If you raise other matters in a formal complaint, the agency may dismiss them from your 
complaint. 

Filing a Formal Complaint 





You may file a formal complaint:

o Within 15 calendar days after receiving a Notice of Right to File a Formal

complaint.

If the agency dismisses all of the formal complaint, you, the complainant, may file an
appeal to the EEOC, Office of Federal Operations (OFO), within 30 calendars. One of the
following will occur:

o If OFO finds the agency’s full dismissal was not proper, OFO will order the agency

to accept the complaint.

o If OFO finds the dismissal of the complaint was proper, you may file a civil action
in U.S. District Court within 90 calendar days after receiving the OFO decision.
o If the OFO does not issue a decision on the appeal 180 calendar days after the



appeal was filed, you may file a civil action in the U.S. District Court.
There is no immediate right to appeal a partial dismissal of a complaint. Where an
agency believes that some but not all of the claims in a complaint should be dismissed,
the agency must:

o Notify the complainant in writing of its determination
o Set forth its rationale for that determination
o Notify the complainant that the allegations will not be investigation

The agency must place a copy of the notice in the investigation file. The agency should advise 
the complainant that an Administration Judge shall review its dismissal determination if s/he 
requests a hearing on the remainder of the complaint, but the complainant may not appeal the 
dismissal until a final action is taken by the agency on the remainder of the complaint. 





If the agency accepts the formal complaint, the agency must complete the investigation
and furnish a copy of the investigation file to you within 180 calendar days after the
formal complaint is filed. You may agree in writing to an extension of not more than 90
calendar days.
You, after receiving the investigative file, have 30 calendar days to request a:

o Hearing before an EEOC Administrative Judge
o Final agency decision without a hearing

 When a complainant requests a hearing, EEOC will appoint an Administrative Judge to

conduct a hearing. Upon appointment, the Judge shall assume full responsibility for the
adjudication of the complaint, including overseeing the development of the record.
The agency must issue a final decision within 60 calendar days of:

o The end of the 30-calendar day period in which you request a hearing or an

immediate final agency decision and the agency does not receive a request for
either a hearing or an immediate final agency decision.

o Receiving your request for an immediate decision without a hearing.

The agency must issue a final decision within 40 calendar days of receiving the decision
of the Administrative Judge when a hearing is requested and held. The agency must file
an appeal with OFO if it does not fully implement the administrative Judge’s decision.
You may file with OFO within 30 calendar days of the agency’s final decision.
You may file a request for reconsideration of the OFO decision within 30 calendar days.
It must be filed with OFO.
You may file a civil action in the U.S. District Court:










o After 180 calendar days of filing the formal complaint if a final agency decision

has not been issued.

o Within 90 calendar days of receiving the agency decision if the agency decisions

is not appealed with OFO.

o After 180 calendar days of filing an appeal with OFO if no decision is issued.
o Within 90 calendar days after receiving the OFO decision.

