Issue Date:     

September 23, 2024 

MEMORANDUM FOR:  

All FEMA Employees 

FROM: 

Deanne Criswell 
Administrator 

SUBJECT: 

Equal Employment Opportunity Reaffirmation Statement 

I am proud to join U.S. Department of Homeland Security Secretary Mayorkas in reaffirming FEMA’s 
commitment to equal employment opportunity (EEO) and civil rights in our workforce. 

Federal laws, regulations, and executive orders protect FEMA employees and applicants against 
employment discrimination. Every FEMA employee and applicant must be treated fairly in all aspects of 
employment in accordance with merit system principles and the law. 

I believe  our diverse workforce is our greatest asset. We strive to build and sustain an inclusive, 
professional work environment at FEMA that reflects our strategic goal of instilling equity as a 
foundation of emergency management, and our core values of compassion, fairness, integrity and 
respect. To realize those core values, every FEMA employee has the freedom to compete on a fair and 
level playing field. Additionally, managers must ensure equal employment opportunities and fairness in 
the implementation of policies, practices, procedures, and conditions.  

I support the ability of all employees to exercise their rights under our federal civil rights statutes. 
Discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin, religion, sex (including pregnancy, sexual 
orientation, gender identity, or transgender status), age, disability, protected genetic information 
(including family medical history), parental status, or reprisal is against the law. Workplace harassment 
will not be tolerated. FEMA will take immediate corrective action against harassing conduct to prevent it 
from becoming pervasive. FEMA will investigate allegations of harassing conduct and take corrective or 
disciplinary action as appropriate. Additionally, reprisal against anyone who engages in protected 
activity will not be tolerated. This includes reporting discrimination or harassment, participating in the 
EEO process, whistleblowing, or using an appeals or grievance process.  

Managers lead our EEO efforts and are expected to fully comply with the law by making employment 
decisions – including those affecting recruitment/hiring, merit promotion, deployment, transfer, 
reassignments, training and career development, benefits, mentoring, awards, and separation – in the 
interest of the public good and in accordance with EEO laws, merit system principles, and the Stafford 
Act. Managers will participate in alternative dispute resolution (ADR) to resolve workplace or EEO 
disputes absent extraordinary circumstances as determined by the Office of Civil Rights Director.   

Managers, supervisors, or employees with questions about conflict prevention, management, or 
resolution options should contact the Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) Division at 202-646-2835 or 
FEMA-ADR@fema.dhs.gov. Managers or employees interested in ADR options for resolving an EEO 
complaint should contact Carletta McDowell (ADR Program Manager) via e-mail at 
Carletta.McDowell@fema.dhs.gov or telephone at 771-444-0976. 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Consistent with the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, employees and applicants with disabilities have a right to 
request a reasonable accommodation. To request a reasonable accommodation, send the request to 
FEMA-OCR-RA@fema.dhs.gov. Additionally, pursuant to the Pregnant Workers Fairness Act (PWFA), 
employees may request reasonable accommodations for conditions related to, affected by, or arising 
out of pregnancy. To request a pregnancy-related accommodation, please contact: FEMA-OCR-
PWFA@fema.dhs.gov. 

Employees who believe they are being, or have been, subjected to unlawful discrimination or a hostile 
work environment (including harassment) based on, or as a result of, discrimination have the right to 
initiate an EEO complaint by contacting the Office of Civil Rights at FEMA-OCR-EEO@fema.dhs.gov or 
202-212-3535. For the complaint to be timely, employees must contact the FEMA Office of Civil Rights 
within 45 days of the alleged date of the discrimination or within 45 days of the date they reasonably 
suspect discrimination. 

I expect everyone at FEMA to uphold a culture of respect, professionalism and inclusiveness in our 
workforce. As we carry out our mission  we all have a responsibility to ensure our actions and behaviors 
demonstrate our commitment to equal employment opportunity and civil rights consistent with the law. 

Sincerely, 
Deanne 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
