FEMA MANUAL 123-9-1 
TELEWORK  
APPROVAL DATE: 1/9/2013 

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY 

Federal Emergency Management Agency 

OFFICE OF THE CHIEF HUMAN CAPITAL OFFICER 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Foreword 

This Manual provides guidance and policy direction for the administration, implementation, and 
oversight of the Federal Emergency Management Agency's (FEMA) Telework Program. FEMA 
considers telecommuting to be a viable alternative work arrangement in cases where individual, job, 
and supervisor characteristics are best suited to such an arrangement. Teleworking allows an 
employee to work at home or other approved alternative work locations during regular working 
hours. Teleworking is a voluntary work alternative that may be appropriate for some employees and 
some jobs. It is not an entitlement and in no way changes the terms and conditions of employment with 
the Agency. 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 

Foreword .........................................................................................................................................................2 

CHAPTER 1: GENERAL INFORMATION ..................................................................................................... 4 
1-1. Purpose .........................................................................................................................................4 

1-2. Applicability and Scope ..................................................................................................................4 

1-3. Supersession .................................................................................................................................4 

1-4. Authorities/ References ..................................................................................................................4 

1-5. Policy ............................................................................................................................................. 5 

1-6. Definitions ..................................................................................................................  7 

1 - 7.    Responsibilities  ..........................................................................................................................  10 

1-8. Reporting Requirement ........................................................................................................... 14 

1-9. Forms Prescribed ..........................................................................................................  14 

1-10. Questions ..................................................................................................................................  14 

CHAPTER 2: PROCEDURES ..................................................................................................................... 15 

2-1. Telework Arrangements ..................................................................................................... 15 

2-2. Determining Eligibility ....................................................................................................  16 

2-3. Training ............................................................................................................  17 

2-4. Appeals ........................................................................................................................................ 17 

CHAPTER 3: TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF THE TELEWORK PROGRAM .................................... 18 

3-1. Changes to Telework Agreement ............................................................................................ 18 

3-2. Residential Telework Environment .......................................................................................... 18 

3-3. Official Duty Station ................................................................................................................ 18 

3-4. Time and Attendance, Work and Performance and Overtime ..................................................... 19 

3-5. Reimbursable Expenses ......................................................................................................... 19 

3-6. Security, Supplies and Equipment ...........................................................................................20 

3-7. Worker’s Compensation and other Liabilities ......................................................................  21 

3-8. Standards of Conduct ............................................................................................................. 21 

3-9. Emergency Situations ............................................................................................................. 21 

3-10. Telework and COOP Planning .............................................................................................. 22 

3 

 
 
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL INFORMATION 

1-1. Purpose 

The purpose of telework is to complete the duties, responsibilities, and other authorized activities 
(such as online training) of an employee’s official position from an alternative worksite, other than 
at the location an employee normally works.  The availability of telework promotes recruitment 
and retention; helps employees manage commutes and other work/life issues; reduces traffic 
congestion, fuel consumption and vehicle emissions; reduces real estate costs; and ensures 
continuity of essential governmental functions in the event of an emergency.  This Manual 
prescribes policy and assigns responsibility for telework. It details position and employee 
eligibility determinations for teleworking. It also addresses performance management of the 
teleworker and provides guidance on security considerations for teleworking. 

1-2. Applicability and Scope 

This Manual applies to all FEMA employees as defined in Title 5 Section 2105 of the United 
States Code, except those excluded from coverage under Pub. L. No. 111-292, Section 6502, 
and those employees deemed ineligible by the Agency to participate in the telework 
program. 

1-3. Supersession  

This Telework policy supersedes FEMA Manual 3000.3, Program Guidance for FEMA 
Telework Program, dated July 31, 2000. 

1-4. Authorities/ References 

A.  P.L. 111-292, “Telework Enhancement Act of 2010,” December 9, 2010. 
B.  P.L. 106-346, “Making appropriations for the Department of Transportation and related 
agencies for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2001, and for other purposes,” 
Section 359 and accompanying conference report. 

C.  P.L. 105-277, “Making omnibus consolidated and emergency appropriations for the fiscal 
year  ending  September  30,  1999,  and  for  other  purposes,”  Title  IV,  “Domestic  Food 
Programs,” Section 630, “Flexiplace Work Telecommuting Programs.” 

D.  P.L. 104-52, “Making appropriations for the Treasury Department, the United States 
Postal Service, the Executive Office of the President, and certain Independent 
Agencies, for the fiscal year ending September 30, 1996, and for other purposes,” 
Section 620. 

E.  U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) Guide to Telework in the Federal 

Government. 

F.  U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) Washington, DC, Area Dismissal and  

Closure Procedures. 

G.  U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) Pandemic Information. 
H.  FMR Bulletin 2006-B3: Guidelines for Alternative Workplace Arrangements, March 17, 

2006. 

I.  FMR Bulletin 2007-B1: Information Technology and Telecommunications Guidelines for 

Federal Telework and Other Alternative Workplace Arrangement Program, March 2, 2007. 

J.  Office of Management and Budget Memorandum, “Protection of Sensitive Agency 

Information,” June 24, 2006. 

K.  DHS Continuity of Operations Programs and Continuity of Government Programs, MD 

9300.1. 

L.  Federal Employees’ Compensation Act (FECA), 5 U.S.C., Chapter 8. 
M.  The Privacy Act of 1974, 5 U.S.C. § 552a. 

4 

 
 
N.  Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 531.605, Determining an Employee's Official 

Worksite. 

O.  Office of Management and Budget Memorandum, “Implementing Telework 

Enhancement Act of 2010 IT Purchasing Requirements”. 

P.  EEOC Enforcement Guidance, “Reasonable Accommodation and Undue Hardship 
Under the Americans with Disabilities Act,” No. 915.002 (October 17, 2002). 

Q.  EEOC Work at Home/Telework as a Reasonable Accommodation, 

http://www.eeoc.gov.facts/telework.html (Oct. 27, 2005). 

R.  DHS MD 250-05 and DHS MD 250-05-001, “Designation of Essential and Exempt 

Personnel”. 

1-5. Policy 

A.  FEMA promotes telework (also known as flexiplace, telecommuting, or work-from-home) as 
a workplace flexibility for recruiting top talent; retaining current employees; reducing the 
cost of office space, absenteeism, and use of workers compensation; and to ensure 
continuity of essential governmental functions in the event of an emergency. 

B.  The FEMA telework program embraces the premise that all positions are presumed 
suitable for telework, unless the official duties require, on a daily basis, an employee to be 
physically present at a worksite because the employee’s duties cannot be performed 
remotely or from an alternate worksite, or that the employee’s duties require the frequent 
and direct handling of sensitive materials inappropriate for telework. 

C.  All eligible employees will be afforded every opportunity to participate in the telework 
program. Employees in occupations typically deemed ineligible for telework who are 
working on rotations or temporary details that include work that is eligible for telework may 
participate in the telework program. See criteria in Section 2-2, Determining Eligibility, for 
further discussion of eligibility requirements. 

D.  Employees participating in the telework program will be provided with the necessary 

government equipment and supplies to adequately perform their tasks at an alternate 
worksite as detailed in Section 3-6, Security and Equipment. 

E.  Telework may be executed either 1) on a regular and recurring basis, meaning that the 
employee teleworks at least one day or more a pay period or 2) on a situational or 
episodic basis, that occurs on an occasional, non-routine circumstance and/or during 
COOP/pandemic health crisis, individual employee medical reasons, or other emergency 
situations. 

F.  Telework for more than one day a pay period may be appropriate for attracting potential 
applicants, retaining current employees, and providing reasonable accommodations for 
employees in accordance with guidance by Office of Equal Rights (OER), as well as for 
accommodating employees housed in Federal buildings undergoing renovation projects 
and for addressing other agency or employee needs. 

G.  Unscheduled situational telework is an important component of FEMA’s ability to operate in 

emergencies. Telework should be incorporated into emergency preparedness operations to 
the broadest extent possible. Unscheduled telework is a way for FEMA and its employees 

5 

 
 
to maintain productivity and help ensure safety of the Federal workforce and the public. For 
example, telework will be considered for situational inclement weather as well as 
emergency situations that involve national security, extended emergencies, or other unique 
situations (See Section 3-9 Emergency Situations). 

H.  As part of FEMA Continuity of Operations Plan (COOP), positions may be designated as 

Mission Critical. These designations should be an integral part of the COOP planning and 
emergency occupant plans. As such, each organization should test its preparedness at 
least annually for an all-staff telework emergency by conducting an exercise where all 
eligible employees telework for at least one day (See Section 3-10).  Designation as Mission 
Critical means the employee in the position is deemed an Emergency Employee for 
purposes of Para. 1-6.H.  

I.  Telework will be considered when planning for any building renovation in any agency 

location, especially where workspace sharing (e.g., hoteling) is required. 

J.  An approved and up-to-date agreement is required for any teleworking arrangement. The 
agreement should outline emergency designations when applicable and allow easy 
implementation for unscheduled telework in emergency or unforeseen situations where 
teleworking may be appropriate. 

K.  Telework training is required for all new teleworkers and their managers before he/she 
begins a telework arrangement.  Employees with telework agreements may also be 
required to undergo periodic retraining.  

L.  Agencies/staff offices must include an appropriate notice in all eligible vacancy 

announcements when the position is eligible for telework. For example, "The duties of this 
position can be performed while teleworking” or “This position is eligible for telework and 
other flexible work arrangements.” 

M.  Telework may be considered appropriate as an accommodation for employees who meet 

reasonable accommodation guidelines in alignment with the Office of Equal Rights (OER). 

N.  If an employee teleworks full time, supervisors must coordinate with Office of Chief 

Component Human Capital Officer (OCCHCO)  to ensure the employee is aware of any 
impact to pay or benefits that may result from the arrangement (See Section 3-3, Official 
Duty Station). 

O.  Employee performance for teleworkers and non-teleworkers will be evaluated using the 
same performance management program and standards that cover workers at traditional 
office/duty locations. This includes providing all employees the same opportunities and 
treatment with regards to work assignments, periodic appraisal of job performance, awards, 
recognition, training and developmental opportunities, promotions, and retention incentives. 

P.  Teleworking  employees  are  subject  to  ensuring  that  records  subject  to  Privacy  Act  and 
sensitive  or  classified  data  are  not  disclosed  to  anyone  except  those  who  are  authorized 
access  to  such  information  in  order  to  perform  their  duties.  Individuals  may  not  remove 
classified data from employees’ official work sites to alternate worksite locations. 

Q.  Teleworking employees continue to be bound by DHS and FEMA standards of conduct and 

performance directives and policies while working at the alternate worksite. 

6 

 
 
R.  Employees rights provided for in the collective bargaining agreement are not affected by 

participation in the telework program. 

S.  Employees can both telework and participate in an Alternate Work Schedule (AWS). 

However, a program office can restrict the combination of the usage of both programs 
by an employee if it negatively impacts  mission accomplishment. 

1-6.  Definitions 

A.  Alternative Work Schedules (AWS):  Work schedules that differ from traditional fixed work 
schedules (e.g., 8 hours per day, 40 hours per week).  There are two categories of AWS:  
Flexible Work Schedules (FWS) or Compressed Work Schedules (CWS). 

B.  Alternate Worksite/Location (AWL): A location where official duties are performed away 
from the traditional worksite. An alternate worksite may be the employee's residence, a 
satellite office, or another approved location. For an employee covered by a telework 
agreement, the alternate worksite may be the employee’s official worksite. 

C.  Compressed Work Schedule (CWS):  A schedule in which the biweekly 80-hour 

requirement for a full-time employee is fulfilled in less than 10 workdays. For a part-time 
employee, the biweekly requirement of LESS than 80 hours is completed in less than 10 
workdays. 

D.  Continuity Facility: Locations other than the primary facility used to carry out essential 
functions during continuity of operations events. In some cases, an employee’s home or 
other virtual office options may be designated as a continuity facility if determined to have 
an acceptable risk level for the execution of essential functions continue. 

E.  Continuity of Operations Plan (COOP): A plan containing procedures designed to ensure 

continuity of essential functions at FEMA under all emergency circumstances. Some of the 
major purposes of a COOP Plan include delineating essential Agency functions, 
specifying the order of succession of Agency leaders and delegations of authority, and 
providing for safekeeping of vital records/databases. Under a COOP, employees with 
and without Telework Agreements may be required to work at an alternate worksite. 
F.  Emergency: Includes national and local security situations, extended emergencies, or other 
unique situations when the Agency is closed or access to an employee’s official duty station 
or other agency facilities is limited. 

G.  Emergency Employees:  Employees who are assigned to positions required to sustain a 

facility or function in the event of a localized situation, such as inclement weather, 
interruption of power, or a dismissal or closure of DHS operations or services.  These 
employees are expected to work even when DHS applies dismissal or closure 
procedures.  The designation of Emergency Employees may vary according to the 
particular nature of an exigency.  Emergency Employees may also be designated 
Mission Critical in Agency COOP plans.  See Para. 1-5.H.  FEMA employees have 
regular and recurring emergency management responsibilities; though not every position 
requires routine deployment to disaster sites, all positions may be subject to recall based 
on mission needs. 

H.  Emergency Relocation Group (ERG): Staff assigned responsibility to continue essential 

7 

 
 
functions from an alternate site in the event that their primary operating facilities are 
threatened or have been incapacitated by an incident. 

I.  Executive Level Managers: Associate Administrators, Regional Administrators, Assistant 

Administrators, and Program Directors and other Office Chiefs. 

J.  FEMA Telework Managing Officer: The senior FEMA employee who serves as the Agency’s 

point of contact to provide overall strategic direction on telework issues. 

K.  FEMA Telework Program Manager: The Program Manager serves as the Agency point of 
contact (POC) for Program Office/Regional Telework Coordinators, for senior managers, 
and for external organizations (e.g., the U.S. Office of Personnel Management, the General 
Services Administration, and the Department of Homeland Security). He/she provides 
leadership, guidance and interpretation, data analysis, training, and evaluation of the 
Agency’s telework program and policy.  

L.  Flexible Work Schedule (FWS):  A schedule in which an employee selects arrival and 

departure times that are outside business hours of, the FEMA activity to which assigned 
but within the flexible time band, and includes 8 hours of duty and a 30-minute lunch 
period each day. 

M.  Mission Essential Functions (MEFs): The limited set of department and agency level 
government functions that must be continued throughout, or resumed rapidly after, a 
disruption of normal activities. 

N.  Primary Mission Essential Functions (PMEFs): Those department and agency Mission 

Essential Functions, validated by the NCC, which must be performed in order to support the 
performance of MEFs before, during, and in the aftermath of an emergency. PMEFs need to 
be continuous or resumed within 12 hours after an event and maintained for up to 30 days 
or until normal operations can be resumed. 

O.  Official Discipline (Formal): An action pertaining to the reprimand, suspension, or removal 
of an employee which is documented and is present in an employee’s electronic Official 
Personnel File (eOPF).  

P.  Official Duty Station: The official worksite is the location of an employee’s position of 
record where the employee regularly performs his/her duties. Certain location-based pay 
entitlements (such as locality payments, special rate supplements, and non-foreign area 
cost-of-living allowances) are based on the location of the employee's official worksite 
associated with the employee's position of record (See Section 3-3, Official Duty Station).  
If the employee's work involves recurring travel or the employee's work location varies on 
a recurring basis (sometimes referred to as “mobile work”), the official worksite is the 
location where the work activities of the employee's position of record are based, as 
determined by the employing agency, subject to the requirement that the official worksite 
must be in a locality pay area in which the employee regularly performs work.  Examples 
of mobile work include site audits, site inspections, investigations, property management, 
and work performed while commuting, traveling between worksites, or on Temporary Duty 
(TDY). 

Q.  Official Home of Record: The employee’s residential address that is officially listed in the 

employee’s Official Personnel Folder (OPF). 

8 

 
 
R.  Personal Identifiable Information (PII): Any information about an individual maintained in 
an agency system of records, including, but not limited to, financial transactions, medical 
history, criminal history, employment history, or any other information which can be 
retrieved using a personal identifier, such as name, Social Security Number, date and 
place of birth, mother’s maiden name, biometric records, and any other personal 
information which is linked or linkable to an individual. 

S.  Portable Work: Work normally performed at an employee’s official worksite that can be 
performed with equal effectiveness at an Alternative Work Location with respect to quality, 
quantity, timeliness, efficiency, customer service, and other aspects of the Agency’s 
mission accomplishment.  This work is part of the employee’s regular assignments and 
does not involve a change in duties or in the way assignments are performed. 

O.  Program Office/Regional Telework Coordinators: FEMA employees who, as part of their 
official duties, serve as points of contact for providing guidance to employees and 
managers in their respective organizations, collect telework data for reports, and oversee 
implementation of the Agency’s Telework Program in their organizations.  In addition, 
they will ensure compliance of the Telework Program with appropriate DHS directives, 
FEMA policies, processes, and procedures, and to identify and implement Telework 
improvements or corrective actions. They work collaboratively with the Agency’s 
Telework Coordinator. 

P.  Re-certification of Telework Agreements: Annual review of an employee’s Telework 

Agreement by the employee’s supervisor to determine the employee’s current eligibility for 
participating in the Telework Program. The employee’s participation in the Telework 
Program may be amended or disapproved (terminated); otherwise agreements remain in 
force. Supervisors must document any amendment in writing by completing a new  
FEMA Form 123-9-0-1, Telework Application and Agreement with the employee.  

Q.  Regular Telework (Core): Work that is performed on an established work schedule at an 
approved AWL on a regular, recurring, and ongoing basis. Telework arrangements may be 
determined by the Supervisor to be full-time or part-time based on eligible telework duties 
and portable work needs (full-time arrangements must consider Section 3-3, Official Duty 
Station). Employees with Regular Telework agreements may also apply for Situational 
Telework in order to work on specific projects and/or in response to an emergency. 

R.  Situational Telework (Episodic): Telework that occurs on an occasional, non-routine basis 
and/or during COOP/pandemic health crisis or other emergency situations. Supervisors 
have discretion to establish timeframes for Situational Telework (Episodic) based on 
work-related factors such as work priority, deadlines, etc. When making an approval for a 
situational telework agreement for a medical reason, special project, or accommodation 
request, the agreement must be reviewed and reapproved every 30 days. Telework 
arrangements may be determined by the Supervisor to be full-time or part-time based on 
eligible telework duties and portable work needs (full-time arrangements must consider 
Section 3-3, Official Duty Station). The definition of situational telework includes 
“unscheduled telework” as defined separately. Situational telework may be used: 

9 

 
 
1.  To allow an employee to perform work on a specific organizational project or a 

discrete portion of a project; 

2.  To permit an employee to perform work at an AWL during inclement weather; 

3.  To allow an employee to perform work when his/her official worksite is not accessible 
(e.g., building damage/emergency, or because of traffic disruption due to street closures, 
conventions, demonstrations, etc.); 

4.  To enable an employee to perform work at an AWL during an agency closure or early 

dismissal (see Section 3-9, Emergency Situations for further detail); or 

5.  For an employee who is recovering from illness or an injury and is temporarily unable to 

physically report to the traditional office, as supported by documentation from the 
employee’s physician. 

S.  Telework:  A  flexible  work  arrangement  under  which  employees  perform  the  duties  and 
responsibilities of their positions from an approved worksite other than the location from 
which the employee would otherwise work. 

T.  Telework Application and Agreement: A written agreement of the terms and conditions of 
the telework arrangement that is completed and signed by the participating employee and 
the supervisor or designee(s).  

U.  Telework-Ready Employee: An employee who meets the eligibility criteria of the 

Telework Program, has completed the required training, has the appropriate space and 
equipment and work assignments needed to work at a location other than the official 
worksite, and has an approved Telework Agreement. 

V.  Tour of Duty: The hours of a day (a daily tour of duty) and the days of an administrative 
workweek (a weekly tour of duty) that constitute an employee's regularly scheduled 
administrative workweek. 

W. Traditional Worksite: The location (i.e., workplace) where an employee would usually 

report for work absent a telework agreement. 

X.  Unscheduled Telework: A term applied in the context of OPM’s Washington, DC, Area 
Dismissal and Closure Procedures, in reference to telework that occurs on day(s) that a 
telework approved employee was not scheduled in advance to telework.  This is 
considered a type of situational telework and applies to all FEMA locations. 

Y.  Workspace Sharing (Hoteling): An arrangement involving two or more employees 
sharing one office/cubicle by coordinating the days each employee is on-site at the 
traditional worksite; or a shared use of non-dedicated workstations by employees (who 
telework the majority of their time) when they are on-site at the traditional worksite. 

1-  7  Responsibilities 

A. Chief Component Human Capital Officer (CCHCO) is responsible for: 

1.  Designating an Agency Telework Managing Officer to administer and oversee the 

telework program for FEMA; and 

2.  Developing Agency specific guidelines on telework necessary to implement DHS policy. 

10 

 
 
 
  
 
B. Executive-Level Managers are responsible for: 

1.  Actively promoting telework within their respective organizations, consistent with 
accomplishing their assigned missions, making every effort to overcome artificial 
barriers to program implementation and integrating telework into continuity of operations 
(COOP) activities;  

2.  Serving as the final deciding authority regarding whether an employee will be allowed to 

telework if a supervisor’s disapproval is appealed by an employee; and 

3.  Determining which employees are Emergency Employees, in coordination with the 

FEMA Telework Program Manager. 

C. Office of Equal Rights (OER) is responsible for: 

1. Providing technical resource information on reasonable accommodation; and 
2. Advising on usage of telework as an accommodation. 

D. Chief Information Officer in coordination with Chief Acquisition Officer is responsible for: 
1.  Procuring allowable Information Technology products and services, to include remote 

access servers, client devices, and internal resources accessible through remote 
access; 

2.  Deploying and modernizing IT systems and infrastructure to support agency 

telework requirements (as applicable to Section 3-6, Security and Equipment); 
and 

3.  Ensuring compliance of devices and infrastructure with federal security and privacy 

requirements. 

E. FEMA Telework Managing Officer is responsible for: 

1.  Developing and evaluating program structure and resources; 
2.  Providing overall strategic program direction; and 
3.  Leveraging support for the telework program throughout the agency by collaborating 

with senior agency officials. 

F. FEMA Telework Program Manager is responsible for: 

1.  Providing overall direction on the implementation of the FEMA telework program in 
accordance with law, this Instruction, and other applicable DHS policies; and program 
implementation, and operation of the telework program in accordance with law, this 
Instruction, and other applicable DHS policies; 

2.  Ensuring oversight for the Agency Telework program, monitoring, evaluating and 

providing guidance and training to all Telework Coordinators; 

3.  Actively promoting telework within the Agency, consistent with accomplishing assigned 

missions, and making every effort to overcome artificial barriers to program 
implementation through education and training for leadership and supervisors on 
telework benefits, performance management in a telework environment, and the 
value of integrating telework into COOP activities; and 

4.  Tracking employee participation and providing usage data at the end of each calendar 

year for submission to the DHS Chief Human Capital Officer or the U.S. Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) for Annual Telework Reporting. Additionally a copy will 
be provided to the FEMA Labor Management Partnership Council. 

G. Telework Coordinators are responsible for: 

1.  Reviewing all submitted Telework forms, agreements, and documents received for 

completeness and compliance; 

11 

 
 
 
2.  Interpreting Telework policy application to regional, directorate, or division level; 
3.  Maintaining accurate records of program participation at regional, directorate, or division 

level; 

4.  Working with the Telework Program Manager to complete and submit regional, 

directorate, or division program reporting requirements; and 

5.  Ensuring employees are fully trained on telework procedures including IT and data 

security and safety requirements. 

H. The FEMA Privacy Office is responsible for providing policy guidance and training for 
employees and managers to ensure that the use of AWL includes  proper handling of 
information protected by the Privacy Act; 

I.  The FEMA Office of the Chief Security Officer is responsible for providing policy guidance 
and training for employees and managers to ensure that the use of AWL does not risk the 
improper disclosure of sensitive but unclassified (For Official Use Only (FOUO)),  or 
classified information; 

J.  FEMA Supervisors are responsible for: 

1.  Ensuring there is adequate coverage during public business hours to enable operations 

to continue to be carried out in an efficient and economical manner and that 
participating and nonparticipating employees are treated equitably; 

2.  Making the determination regarding whether requesting employees are eligible for 

telework; 

3.  Determining whether employees’ duties include sufficient portable work to permit 

regular telework for a given number of days per pay period; 

4.  In collaboration with OCCHCO, ensure that, as appropriate, position descriptions 

are updated to reflect which positions are not suitable for telework and the 
reasons for such determinations; 

5.  Approving or disapproving requests for telework (When making an approval for a 

situational telework agreement for a medical reason, special project, or accommodation 
request, the agreement must be reviewed and reapproved every 30 days. A request for 
approval for an employee to telework outside of their normal commuting area or in 
another geographical area should be handled as a request for change of duty location 
and not a telework request.); 

6.  Justifying, in writing, the basis for the disapproval or termination of telework in the 
comments portion of the telework request; and communicating clearly to their 
employees the reasons for the disapproval of employees’ telework requests; 
7.  Monitoring and reviewing  all telework arrangements annually to make sure mission 

requirements are being met; 

8.  Monitoring employee performance and terminating telework arrangements if an 
employee’s performance does not meet or exceed the  “proficient,” or “achieved 
expectations” standard, or if the teleworking arrangement fails to meet organizational 
needs; 

9.  Ensuring proper accountability of government equipment assigned to teleworkers; 
10. In the event of lost or stolen equipment, conducting an inquiry into the facts and 

circumstances, and reporting findings in accordance with FEMA’s Personal Property 
Manual 119-7-1, specifically FEMA Form 119-7-1-1, Report of Survey;  

11. Ensuring that employees comply with laws, policies, and directives to prevent the 
unauthorized disclosure of information that is confidential, sensitive, classified, or 
PII; 

12 

 
 
 
 
12. Contacting the Office of Equal Rights for additional guidance before approving an 

episodic and situational or regular and recurring telework agreement in cases where 
an employee requests telework as an accommodation for disability; and 
13. Engaging and involving Agency Labor Representatives, where applicable, in 
determining the types of positions and tasks eligible for telework. Engaging and 
involving Equal Rights representatives where exclusive representation is not 
applicable in determining the types of positions and tasks eligible for telework. 

K. FEMA Employees are responsible for: 

1.  Completing and signing a telework agreement detailing the location and requirements 
of the alternate worksite. (If requesting telework at home, designate one area in the 
home as the official work station for purposes of telework on the Telework Agreement 
(e.g., First Floor Office) and complete the attached self–certification safety checklist); 
2.  Maintaining a level of performance that is at the proficient or “achieved expectations” 

level or higher; 

3.  Protecting all government-provided equipment and software from loss, theft, or damage 

(including environmental damage); 

4.  Ensuring the security of all official, sensitive, and, in particular, for official use only 
(FOUO) data, and strictly adhering to Agency information and electronic security 
policies; 

5.  Agreeing to protect government records from unauthorized disclosure or damage and to 
comply with the requirements of all information security laws, rules, and regulations, 
including the Privacy Act of 1974; 

6.  Immediately notifying his or her supervisor and all appropriate Agency officials, 

including the Privacy Officer, when a loss, theft, or compromise of personal information 
or government equipment occurs; 

7.  Working at the traditional worksite on telework days if necessitated by work 

requirements, or as directed; 

8.  Updating his or her application for Transit Subsidy benefits within 10 

working days of the approval of a regular telework agreement; 

9.  Ensuring the designated area in his or her home complies with safety requirements for 

work-at-home telework; 

10. Notifying their supervisor immediately of any accident or injury at the alternate worksite 

and completing the required documentation; 

11. Notifying their supervisor if equipment failure or other technical reasons affect their 

ability to telework efficiently;  

12. Forwarding office telephones to the agency issued equipment; (this requirement will be 
dependent upon the phone system at the employee’s traditional worksite, as all systems 
do not have the call forwarding feature);  

13. Adhering to the established work schedule and properly accounting for and reporting 

actual hours worked; and 

14. Adhering to the same workday requirements when performing work at the AWL as 

they would be if they were performing work at the official duty station. 

1-8. Reporting Requirement  

OCCHCO will collect the appropriate information and report to DHS Chief Human Capital 
Officer and OPM as directed. 

1-9. Forms Prescribed  

A. 

FEMA Form 123-9-0-1, Telework Application and Agreement Form 

13 

 
 
 
B. 

FEMA Form 123-9-0-2, Employee Self-Certification Safety and Health Checklist 

1-10. Questions  

Questions concerning Telework should be addressed to the Office of Chief Component 
Human Capital Officer at (202) 646-3962. 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 2: PROCEDURES 

2-1. Telework Arrangements 

A. While participation in telework is not an employee entitlement, FEMA assumes that all 

positions are eligible for telework unless the supervisor can document otherwise that official 
duties are not suitable for work in a remote or alternate worksite.  An employee may 
participate in the program if the employee meets eligibility requirements as outlined in Section 
2-2, Determining Eligibility. 

B.  A complete telework documentation package must be submitted to the Telework 

Coordinator prior to the participation of an employee in the telework program including: 
1.  A completed and signed FEMA Telework Program Application and Agreement 

Form, which has been prepared in accordance with this policy and attests to the validity 
of eligibility and program participation.  This is required to document any form of telework 
arrangement and prior to the beginning of telework.  Telework plan should be attached; 

2.  The FEMA Telework Health and Safety Checklist must be completed and signed; 
3.  Documentation of completed telework training program as described in Section 2-3, 

Training; and 

4.  Completion of any documentation related to applicable telework equipment. 
C.  A telework arrangement does not alter the terms and conditions of the appointment as 
specified on the employee's Notification of Personnel Action, SF-50. However, an 
employee's official duty station may change if he or she does not regularly commute into 
the agency office (See Section 3-3, Official Duty Station). The telework arrangement must not 
affect other conditions of employment (e.g., hours of work) unless otherwise specified in the 
telework agreement. Employees may be approved both to telework and to work an alternative 
work schedule. 

D. The telework arrangement may normally be terminated in writing by either management or 

by the employee with reasonable advance notice, generally fourteen calendar days, but not 
less than seven calendar days.  Reasons for termination of an arrangement may be a 
decline in performance or productivity, or if the arrangement no longer benefits the 
organization's needs.  Program Offices may establish specific termination provisions, as they 
deem necessary, for their operations and mission needs.  When an arrangement is 
terminated by management, the supervisor must provide the employee with a brief, written 
explanation as to why.    

E.  The  telework  agreement  shall  be  for  the  performance  of  official  duties  or  related  activities 
(professional  development,  training)  and  shall  not  be  treated  as  an  opportunity  to  conduct 
personal business. 

F.  Teleworkers are responsible for ensuring appropriate arrangements for the care of 

dependents at home if the home is their official telework duty location. That is, employees may 
not use telework to personally care for a dependent. However, this does not preclude a 
teleworker from having a caregiver working in the home providing care to the 
dependent(s) while he/she teleworks. 

G.  Management reserves the right, normally with one day notice, to require employees to 
return to the official duty location on scheduled telework days, based on operational 
requirements.  Exceptions for a lesser notification may be appropriate in certain unforeseen 
situations. 

H.  Approved telework agreements should be coordinated with the Agency Transit Subsidy 

Manager. Notify the Agency Transit Subsidy Manager of the number of days the employee 
will telework so the transit subsidy coordinator can determine if the employee’s subsidy 
should be reduced appropriately. 

15 

 
 
I.  Employees who telework must be available to their coworkers, supervisor, and customers 
in the same manner as if they were in their duty location. For example, phone calls and 
emails must be answered in the same timeframe as if the employee were working in their 
duty location. This means that phones may normally be forwarded to agency issued 
equipment. It may also mean that the employee should provide a secondary phone number 
to be reached at the telework site if possible. Specific communication expectations shall be 
addressed in the telework agreement, if necessary. 

J.  During emergency situations, such as closures of the employee’s official duty station, or 
during heightened periods of disaster work activity,, the agency may require employees 
with telework agreements to telework on short notice.  See Paragraph 3-9. 

2-2. Determining Eligibility 

A.  Positions eligible for telework are those involving tasks (may be one or more) and work 
activities that are portable, do not depend on the employee being at the official duty 
location worksite, are measureable, and are conducive to supervisory oversight at the 
alternate worksite. Job series and title do not determine eligibility as supervisors and 
managers are required to encourage all eligible employees the opportunity to Telework. 
B.  Tasks and work activities generally suited for telework include, but are not limited to: 

reading, reviewing, editing, scheduling, planning, writing, and policy development; research; 
analysis (e.g., investigating, program analysis, policy analysis, and financial analysis); 
report writing; telephone-intensive tasks (excluding receptionist duties); computer-oriented 
tasks (e.g., required or developmental training, programming, data entry, word processing, 
web page design) and data processing. Tasks and work activities not generally suited for 
telework include, but are not limited to positions that: involve daily handling of classified 
materials; require the use of specialized equipment; require daily contact with other people; 
or where a daily physical presence is required per the official duties of the position. FEMA 
positions that are not typically suited for core telework include: inspectors, fire fighters, 
warehouse staff, and similar positions. However, these positions may still be suitable for 
Situational Telework on a case-by-case basis. The premise is that positions are eligible for 
telework and supervisors must document exceptions. 

C.  An employee suitable for telework is one who has demonstrated personal characteristics 

that are well suited to telework, as determined by the supervisor, including as a minimum: 
1.  Demonstrated dependability and the ability to handle responsibility; 
2.  A proven record of high personal motivation, independence, dependability, good time 
management skills, ability to prioritize work effectively, and ability to work without 
close supervision; 

3.  The ability to prioritize work effectively and utilize good time management skills; 
4.  A proven, or on target for, a minimum current performance rating of at least 

“proficient,” or “achieved expectations” in all performance criteria as designated by 
the FEMA performance management programs;  

5.  The employee must not be on leave restriction; and, 
6.  No adverse personnel actions within any of the following categories: 

A.  A Letter of Reprimand, a suspension without pay, or removal, imposed for 

absence without leave for more than 5 days in a calendar year or for violations of 
Subpart G of the Standards of Ethical Conduct of Employees of the Executive 
Branch for viewing, downloading, or exchanging pornography, including child 
pornography, on a Federal Government computer or while performing official 
Federal Government duties), to the extent that such action remains in the 
employee’s OPF, precludes approval of telework.   

16 

 
 
 
B.  Imposition of any other disciplinary or adverse action not included in A., above, 

within the previous six months precludes approval of telework. 

C.  Imposition of any other disciplinary or adverse action not included in A. or B., 
above, regardless of age of the action, may preclude approval of telework, in 
the discretion of the supervisor. 

D.  An employee may not be approved for telework for one year from the date of 

commencement of a performance improvement plan (PIP). 

2-3. Training 

A.  The employee must complete the telework awareness training prior to signing an initial 

telework agreement and prior to starting to telework. Training is available at: 
http://www.telework.gov/tools and resources/training/employees/index.aspx 

B.  Supervisors must complete telework awareness training in order to approve a telework 

arrangement. Training is available at: 
http://www.telework.gov/toolsandresources/training/managers/index.aspx 

2-4. Appeals 

An employee denied a request to telework may appeal to the appropriate Executive 
Level Manager.  The appeals process must ensure that the employee and management 
have a fair and equitable opportunity to be heard. Appeal decisions are binding for no 
more than six months unless circumstances change or are agreed upon by both parties 
involved in the appeal. It is FEMA policy that whenever possible, individuals be allowed to 
telework, so the burden in an appeal on why the agency would not allow telework is on the 
supervisor, not on the employee. With respect to employees covered by a collective 
bargaining agreement, appeals will be governed by the negotiated grievance procedure.  
The Telework Coordinator will notify the employee of the appeal decision. 

17 

 
 
CHAPTER 3: TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF THE TELEWORK PROGRAM 

3-1. Changes to Telework Agreement  

An employee who teleworks may be required to come into the office on their telework 
day when management makes a determination their presence is required. At least a 
one-day notice should be given to the employee, however unforeseen circumstances 
may require less notice. A teleworker who must report to the official duty station 
should do so in a reasonable amount of time. Items to take into consideration are 
traveling distance, mode of transportation, etc. Teleworkers and management should 
discuss these items. In some cases, there may not be sufficient time for the teleworker to 
report to the official duty station. Teleworkers who wish to change their scheduled 
telework day permanently should complete another agreement and obtain the proper 
approvals. Intermittent changes in a telework agreement do not require a change in the 
agreement; however teleworkers should make the request at least one day in 
advance. 

3-2. Residential Telework Environment  

A.  It is the responsibility of the employee to ensure that all the requirements to do official 

work at their residence are met in an environment that allows the tasks to be 
performed safely (See attached FEMA Form 123-9-0-2, Employee Self-Certification 
Safety and Health Checklist). 

B.  The employee must designate an area in the home as their official work area. The 
area designated must be documented on the telework agreement. The employee 
should check with their community associations, if one exists, to ensure there is not a 
restriction on working from home. 

C.  Each teleworker must understand that telework is not a substitute for dependent 

care. A caregiver, however, may be present in the home to take care of a dependent 
(e.g., infant, non-school age child and/or an elder) while the teleworker is performing 
their official duties. Children who require no supervision may be present at the alternate 
worksite. Management may request documentation from the teleworker to 
substantiate a caregiver is providing on-site or off-site care during the teleworker's 
scheduled work. 

D.  The Government is not responsible for any operating costs in the Residential 

Telework Environment that are associated with the employee's use of his or her 
personal residence as an alternate worksite. This includes home maintenance, 
insurance, or utilities. 

E.  The employee agrees to permit access to their home by agency representatives 

when necessary to ensure proper maintenance of agency-owned 
equipment.  Teleworkers should be given at least one day’s advance notice of any 
such visit. Visits should only be done during regular working hours.  

3-3. Official Duty Station  

A.  All pay, leave, and travel entitlements must be based on the employee's official 
duty station. The employee's official duty station for such purposes as special 
salary rates, locality pay adjustments, and travel is the city or town, county, and 
state in which the employee normally performs their official duties. Supervisors must 
consult with OCCHCO if there are any changes that warrant a change in the official 
duty station. 

B.  An employee's official duty station must be documented on the employee's Notification 
of Personnel Action (Standard Form 50 or equivalent). (See "Duty Station" blocks 

18 

 
 
 
38  and  39  of  the  Standard  Form  50  showing  the  city/county  and  state  in  which  the 
official worksite is located.) 

C.  An employee's official duty station would not change as long as the employee 

regularly commutes into the agency office at least twice each biweekly pay period on a 
regular and recurring basis. 

D.  If the employee does not regularly commute into the agency office at least twice 
each biweekly pay period, the official duty station must be changed to the alternate 
worksite. The official duty station would not generally be changed for employees who 
telework for medical reasons and/or in emergency situations (i.e. COOP, agency 
closures, urgent deadlines, etc.) as these types of telework arrangements are not 
intended as permanent, but on a temporary basis not to exceed six months. 

E.  When an employee’s official worksite/duty station is reassigned from the traditional 

worksite to the alternate worksite, the affected employee and his/her supervisor should 
discuss the implications of the reassignment, to include: 

1.  Certain location-based pay entitlements (e.g., locality pay, special 
rate supplements, and non-foreign cost of living allowances, etc.) are 
based on the location of the employee’s official worksite/duty station. 
2.  Reimbursement for official business travel is based on the location of the 

employee’s official worksite/duty station. For example, when an employee 
whose alternate worksite is outside the commuting area of the traditional 
worksite is required to travel to the traditional worksite, the location of the 
employee’s official worksite/duty station will determine whether the employee 
or the Component pays for the required travel. 

3.  Generally, the official worksite/duty station is used to identify the competitive 

area during reduction-in-force determinations. 

3-4. Time and Attendance, Work and Performance, and Overtime  

A.  Time spent in a telework status must be accounted for and reported in the same 

manner as if the employee reported for duty at the official duty station. The 
employee is required to satisfactorily complete all assigned work, consistent with the 
approach adopted for all other employees in the work group, and according to 
standards and guidelines in the employee's performance plan. 

B.  The employee agrees to follow their normal mission area/agency/staff office 

procedures regarding the requesting and approval of overtime, credit hours, and 
leave that are worked while in a telework status. 

C.  All approved telework hours are to be reported in the WebTA Time Attendance 
and System. Employees should code use WebTA transaction code 01- Telework 
Home <=2 days if equal to or less than two days per work week and transaction 
code 01-Telework Home >2 days for three or more days per work week. 

3-5. Reimbursable Expenses  

The FEMA Office of the Chief Financial Officer will set policy for determining any 
applicable reimbursable expenses for eligible telework employees. 

19 

 
 
 
 
3-6. Security, Supplies, and Equipment  

A.  Classified documents (hard copy or electronic) and/or equipment (e.g., diskettes, 
computers, laptops, removable hard drives, and other media used for processing 
classified information) must not  be taken to an employee's alternate worksite. For 
core telework, FOUO Information may be accessed using employee-owned 
equipment but may only be saved on government-issued equipment. 

B.  All teleworkers are responsible for the security of all official data, and the protection 

of government-issued equipment/property while carrying out the mission of 
FEMA. Government-issued equipment must only be used for official duties and 
only by the teleworker. A FEMA approved remote access solution must be used 
(such as a virtual private network or Citrix solution). Authorization to telework is 
contingent upon the availability of equipment and connectivity at the alternate 
worksite sufficient to permit the employee reliable and secure access to email, 
telephone, and any other systems necessary to perform the duties of his or her 
position efficiently and without any detriment to mission accomplishment. The 
employee is responsible for the installation, repair, and maintenance of their own 
personal equipment in coordination with CIO guidance. 

C. 

If needed, the Agency will provide necessary office supplies (paper, pens, 
compact disc , etc.). Employees should obtain these items from the official duty 
station supply room or through the regular procedure at their official duty station. 
The Agency will not reimburse employees for any supplies purchased 
independently, nor will the Agency provide office furniture except as a reasonable 
accommodation. 

D.  The agency is responsible for obtaining software licenses that are necessary to give 
the teleworker access on their personal equipment to perform their official duties. 
When the telework arrangement ends, the teleworker is responsible for removing 
and returning all government-owned software to the agency Software Manager or 
agency Chief Information Officer. The responsibilities for configuration 
management, patch and antivirus management, and other administrative 
requirements must be defined in this agreement to include the expectations of the 
teleworker in these matters. The agency is responsible for the maintenance of all 
Government-issued equipment. The teleworker may be required to bring such 
equipment into the office for maintenance. The employee must return all 
Government-issued equipment and material to the agency at the conclusion of the 
telework arrangement or at the agency's request. 

E.  FOUO Information must be transported from the official duty station to the 

alternate worksite in a secure container (e.g., briefcase with lock). Sensitive But 
Unclassified Information, including SSI, Privacy Act, and "For Official Use Only" 
data and non-sensitive, unclassified data must be stored in a secure file cabinet at 
the alternate worksite. When such information is displayed on a computer screen, it 
must not be visible to others. Computer privacy screens which block computer 
screen visibility to others must be used when SSI is displayed on a computer 
monitor at an alternate worksite. Neither family members nor other individuals 
are authorized to handle and/or view any government Sensitive But Unclassified 
Information, including SSI, Privacy Act, and "For Official Use Only" data. 

20 

 
 
 
3-7.   Worker’s Compensation and Other Liabilities  

Employees are covered by the Federal Employees Compensation Act at the alternate 
worksite as long as the injury occurred while performing their official duties and in the 
designated work area identified on the telework agreement. If an injury occurs, the 
employee must notify the supervisor immediately, provide details of the accident or 
injury, and complete Department of Labor Form CA-1, Federal Employee's Notice of 
Traumatic Injury and Claim for Continuation of Pay/Compensation. The government is not 
liable for damages to the employee's personal or real property while the employee is 
teleworking, except to the extent the government is held liable under the Federal Tort 
Claims Act or the Military and Civilian Employees Claims Act. 

3-8.   Standards of Conduct  

The employee acknowledges that he/she continues to be bound by the Standards of 
Ethical Conduct for Employees of the Executive Branch while teleworking and using 
government-issued equipment. 

3-9.   Emergency Telework.  

A.  Supervisors  and  managers  shall  classify  their  employees  as  emergency  and  non-
emergency  employees  promptly  and  appropriately,  and  shall  maximize  telework 
readiness among their employees in a manner consistent with this policy. 

B.  OPM Announcements.  Employees shall monitor, read and comply with OPM 

announcements unless otherwise directed by the Agency or their supervisors.  To 
the extent that OPM announcements conflict with FEMA and supervisory guidance, 
employees must follow FEMA and supervisory guidance.   

C.  When OPM announces that Federal agencies in the Washington, DC, area are 

open and that employees have the options of unscheduled leave or unscheduled 
telework, the following procedures apply: 

1.  Emergency Employees must report for duty as directed unless they are telework 

ready and permitted to telework by their supervisors. 

2.  Non-Emergency Employees shall notify their supervisors in advance if they 

intend to take unscheduled leave. 

3.  Non-Emergency Telework Ready Employees.  The Agency may direct non-

emergency, telework ready employees to perform unscheduled telework.  If not 
directed to telework, they must report to work, take unscheduled leave or request 
their supervisor’s permission to telework. 

D.  When OPM announces that Federal agencies in the Washington, DC, area are 

closed, or when FEMA closes an employee’s official duty station, non-emergency 
employees (including employees on pre-approved paid leave) will be granted 
excused absence (administrative leave) for the number of hours they were 
scheduled to work unless they are covered by one of the following categories: 

1.  Emergency Employees must report for duty as directed unless they are telework 

ready and permitted to telework by their supervisors. 

2.  Non-Emergency,Telework Ready Employees who are already scheduled to 

telework or who are directed to perform unscheduled telework must telework the 
entire work day.  If directed to telework, such employees may request the use of 
(1) earned annual leave, compensatory time off, credit hours, or sick leave, as 

21 

 
 
appropriate; (2) leave without pay; (3) their flexible work schedule day off or 
revision of their work hours under flexible work schedules.  On a case-by-case 
basis, FEMA supervisors may excuse a telework ready employee from duty as 
outlined in ¶ 3-9 F.   

4.  The status of employees on Leave Without Pay, official travel, or an alternate 

work schedule day off is not affected by any such announcement. 

E.  COOP Activation.  The Agency may require any employee to telework in accordance 

with an activated COOP plan.  

F.  Excusal.  Supervisors may excuse telework ready employees from work and grant 
annual or administrative leave with pay, as appropriate, when an emergency 
adversely affects the telework site (e.g., disruption of electricity, loss of heat, loss of 
connectivity, etc.), or if the teleworker faces a personal hardship that prevents him or 
her from teleworking effectively.  Dependent care needs do not ordinarily entitle a 
teleworker to administrative leave; annual leave will be granted as appropriate. 

3-10.  Telework and COOP Planning.  All organizations must incorporate telework into their 

continuity plans and procedures by: 

A.  Assessing the organization’s essential functions to identify which functions the 
organization can conduct via telework, including evaluating the use of telework for 
supporting extended continuity operations and use by non-emergency response 
group (ERG) personnel; 

B.  Establishing and maintaining plans and procedures to use telework as a primary or 
backup continuity strategy for those essential functions and supporting tasks that are 
telework authorized, based upon the assessment; 

C.  Assessing  the  capability  of  situational  telework  agreements  for  both  ERG  and  non-
ERG  personnel,  to  ensure  that  employees  may  be  authorized  to  telework  during  a 
continuity event; 

D.  Establishing situational telework agreements for all employees to determine their 

eligibility to telework during a continuity activation; 

E.  Ensuring that each eligible employee is authorized to telework during a continuity 
activation by successfully completing the required telework training program (as 
described in Section 2-3, Training) and completing necessary documentation (as 
described in Section 2-1, Telework Arrangements, Part B); and 

F.  Coordinating with FEMA’s designated Telework Managing Officer when developing 

and integrating the organization’s continuity plan. 

22 

 
 
 
 
 
