From:
To:
Subject:
Date:
Attachments:

In, Anthony
Meindl, Max
FW: FEMA Employee-Exempt
Friday, March 22, 2024 12:22:15 PM
Attachment 2-Employee Exempt Notice.docx

MEMORANDUM FOR:    FEMA Employee – Exempt

FROM:                                 Anthony In, Supervisory Emergency Management Specialist

SUBJECT:                                           Employee Status Notice

You are receiving this message to notify you that in the event of a lapse in appropriations you are an
exempt employee. This is not a furlough notice.

Exempt: Employees are exempt from furlough if their salaries are funded from other than annually
appropriated and lapsing funds. This includes Reservists, Cadre of On-Call Response/Recovery
Employees (COREs), and Local Hires whose salaries are funded from the Disaster Relief Fund (DRF or
Fund 6).

v/r

Tony

Anthony In
Infrastructure Branch Director| Recovery Division | Region 6
Cell Number 202-615-6165
Anthony.in@fema.dhs.gov
“Humble yourself, be kind to each other and always remember to Do the Right Thing”.

Federal Emergency Management Agency
fema.gov

 WARNING:  This document is FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) and may contain PRIVACY SENSITIVE information.  Any misuse
or unauthorized access may result in both civil and criminal penalties.  It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted,
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO information.  This information shall not be
distributed beyond the original addressees without prior authorization of the originator. This communication, along with any
attachments, is covered by Federal and State law governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and legally
privileged information.  If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any
dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this message is strictly prohibited.  If you have received this in error, please reply

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

 
 
