In, Anthony
Weatherall, Micki; Washington, Anita M; Davis, Henry; Teter, Sean; Smith, David; Quinones Crespo, Joel; Meindl,
Max
FW: ATS example, WebTA to GovTA
Friday, January 19, 2024 9:02:02 AM
GovTA-FAQs (1).pdf
ATS Check In.docx

From:
To:

Subject:
Date:
Attachments:

FYSA.

Thank you, Micki, for sharing.

v/r

Tony

Anthony In
Infrastructure Branch Director 4652-NM| Recovery Division | Region 6
Cell Number 202-615-6165
Anthony.in@fema.dhs.gov

Federal Emergency Management Agency
fema.gov

 WARNING:  This document is FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) and may contain PRIVACY SENSITIVE information.  Any misuse
or unauthorized access may result in both civil and criminal penalties.  It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted,
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO information.  This information shall not be
distributed beyond the original addressees without prior authorization of the originator. This communication, along with any
attachments, is covered by Federal and State law governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and legally
privileged information.  If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any
dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this message is strictly prohibited.  If you have received this in error, please reply
immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

From: Weatherall, Micki <micki.weatherall@fema.dhs.gov> 
Sent: Friday, January 19, 2024 7:59 AM
To: In, Anthony <anthony.in@fema.dhs.gov>
Subject: ATS example, WebTA to GovTA

GovTA to Replace WebTA

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We learned that our “beloved” payroll system, WebTA 3.8 has reached end of life. As a result,
DHS is implementing the new GovTA system as the time and attendance system for all its
components. The rollout is expected to take place in February 2024, but we are still waiting on
confirmation.

We encourage you to access this Payroll & Processing - GovTA-FAQs.pdf - All Documents
(sharepoint.com) to learn more about the new system. The Office of the Chief Human Capital
Officer (OCHCO) will offer training sessions and we will certainly keep you posted as we learn
about the dates.

An icon will also be added to the DHS Connect homepage for easy navigation to the site.

You should receive the GovTA URL via an email on February 9, 2024. The email will provide
instructions on how to log in using your existing webTA username and password or with single sign-
on using your PIV card.

Your existing webTA user ID and password can be used to log into GovTA the first time.  GovTA will
prompt you to update your password from your 12-character password to a 15-character password.
Your username will remain the same.

26 pay periods of data will roll over from webTA to GovTA for any time and attendance corrective
actions.

Employees should reach out to their timekeepers for assistance.

Let me know if I can help further,

Micki Weatherall
PDTFL DR 4698-AR & DR 4748-AR
Recovery Division| Region VI Public Assistance
Mobile: (202) 704-1309
micki.weatherall@fema.dhs.gov

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
