In, Anthony
Washington, Anita M; Weatherall, Micki; Kusy, Alma; Reed, Sha"Cortney; Davis, Henry; Meindl, Max; Smith,
David; Quinones Crespo, Joel; Teter, Sean
FW: Email Signature
Wednesday, December 4, 2024 7:09:56 AM
image001.png
image002.png
image003.png
image004.png
image006.png
image007.png
image005.png

From:
To:

Subject:
Date:
Attachments:

All~

R6 staff are required to include an email signature with contact information.  Please ensure you
understand and update, as necessary. Let me know if you have any questions.
See instruction below.  

v/r

Tony

Anthony In
Infrastructure Branch Director| Recovery Division | Region 6
Cell Number 202-615-6165
Anthony.in@fema.dhs.gov
“Humble yourself, be kind to each other and always remember to Do the Right Thing”.

Federal Emergency Management Agency
fema.gov

 WARNING:  This document is FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) and may contain PRIVACY SENSITIVE information.  Any misuse
or unauthorized access may result in both civil and criminal penalties.  It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted,
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO information.  This information shall not be
distributed beyond the original addressees without prior authorization of the originator. This communication, along with any
attachments, is covered by Federal and State law governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and legally
privileged information.  If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any
dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this message is strictly prohibited.  If you have received this in error, please reply
immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

From: Aguilo, Karina <Karina.Aguilo@fema.dhs.gov> 
Sent: Wednesday, November 27, 2024 4:58 PM

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To: R6-All-Hands <R6AllHands@fema.dhs.gov>; FEMA-LIRO-ALL-HANDS <FEMA-LIRO-ALL-
HANDS@fema.dhs.gov>; FEMA-R6-TIRO-All-Hands <FEMA-R6-TIRO-All-Hands@fema.dhs.gov>;
FEMA-NMJRO-All-HANDS <FEMA-NMJRO-All-HANDS@fema.dhs.gov>
Subject: Workforce Wednesday Update

Hello Region 6!

Here are this week’s topics.  Hope everyone has a Happy Thanksgiving Holiday!  Please be safe.

Federal Benefits Open Season
Open season is your opportunity to elect, review, renew, change, or terminate your participation
in the Federal Employees Health Benefits (FEHB) Program, the Federal Dental and Vision
Insurance Program (FEDVIP), and the Federal Flexible Spending Program (FSAFEDS). Open
season is November 11 – December 9, 2024.

 FEHB/FEDVIP

§  Enrollees who wish to continue their current FEHB/FEDVIP enrollments do not need to
take action during this open season as long as their insurance carriers have not dropped out
of FEHB/ FEDVIP or dropped their enrollment code.

§   Please review your plan and verify it will continue its coverage into 2024 by visiting OPM’s
Open Season Webpage for significant plan changes under the FEHB and FEDVIP programs.
OPM’s site also includes FEHB guides, brochures, and plan comparison tools.

 FEHB Changes (changes effective January 12, 2025)

§  Employees making enrollment changes are encouraged to do so as early as possible
during open season to ensure timely processing. If your current plan will terminate its
participation in the FEHB Program after January 11, 2025, or if your plan will no longer offer
the enrollment option you previously selected, you MUST enroll in a different plan to
continue FEHB coverage in 2025.

§   All FEHB changes during this Open Season must be made using the National Finance
Center Employee Personal Page (EPP) (user id and password required).

§   Employees can make one change via EPP. The system will not allow you to make multiple
elections if you change your mind.

 FEDVIP Changes (changes effective January 1, 2025)

§  To enroll or change enrollment in a FEDVIP plan, you must create an account or log in to
your existing account at BENEFEDS. If you do not have access to a computer, call 1-877-
888-FEDS (1-877-888-3337), TTY number 1-877-889-5680 to enroll or change your

 
 
 
Workforce Wednesday Update

Federal Benefits Open Season
Open season is your opportunity to elect, review, renew, change, or terminate your participation
in the Federal Employees Health Benefits (FEHB) Program, the Federal Dental and Vision
Insurance Program (FEDVIP), and the Federal Flexible Spending Program (FSAFEDS). Open
season is November 11 – December 9, 2024.

 FEHB/FEDVIP

§  Enrollees who wish to continue their current FEHB/FEDVIP enrollments do not need to
take action during this open season as long as their insurance carriers have not dropped out
of FEHB/ FEDVIP or dropped their enrollment code.

§   Please review your plan and verify it will continue its coverage into 2024 by visiting OPM’s
Open Season Webpage for significant plan changes under the FEHB and FEDVIP programs.
OPM’s site also includes FEHB guides, brochures, and plan comparison tools.

 FEHB Changes (changes effective January 12, 2025)

§  Employees making enrollment changes are encouraged to do so as early as possible
during open season to ensure timely processing. If your current plan will terminate its
participation in the FEHB Program after January 11, 2025, or if your plan will no longer offer
the enrollment option you previously selected, you MUST enroll in a different plan to
continue FEHB coverage in 2025.

§   All FEHB changes during this Open Season must be made using the National Finance
Center Employee Personal Page (EPP) (user id and password required).

§   Employees can make one change via EPP. The system will not allow you to make multiple
elections if you change your mind.

 FEDVIP Changes (changes effective January 1, 2025)

§  To enroll or change enrollment in a FEDVIP plan, you must create an account or log in to
your existing account at BENEFEDS. If you do not have access to a computer, call 1-877-
888-FEDS (1-877-888-3337), TTY number 1-877-889-5680 to enroll or change your
enrollment.

 Flexible Spending Accounts (changes effective January 1, 2025)

§  Enrollment in Flexible Spending Accounts (FSA) do not carry over from year-to-year.

§  You must re-enroll to continue into 2025. To enroll in a flexible spending account for
2025, create an account or log in to your existing account at FSAFEDS.

Reservists Guidance

§  Reservists are not eligible to participate or enroll in the FEHB, FEDVIP and FSAFEDS
programs listed above unless they are currently enrolled or currently deployed.

§  Reservists with questions should email FEMA-HC-Reservists-Benefits@fema.dhs.gov.

Email Signature Instructions
Below are instructions on how to create the required email signatures for Desktop Outlook,
Web-based Outlook, and Mobile Outlook. You must update your email signature in all three
platforms, as updates will not carry over from other applications. The instructions for each
platform build off each other, so follow them in order.

Template

Name

Title | Lower-Level Organization | Higher-Level Organization

Office: (xxx) xxx-xxxx | Mobile: (xxx) xxx-xxxx

Firstname.lastname@fema.dhs.gov

Instructions

1.     Find which organization level(s) you need to include on your signature from your office
leadership.

a.                After your title, there are two spaces to insert organizational levels.

b.                The Senior Executive at each component level will determine the
appropriate lower organizational and higher organizational level for your use. If
you are not certain about your levels, please ask your supervisor.

c.                There can be no more than two organizational levels in your email
signature.

Introducing – Slido
Slido is an interactive tool that allows you to engage your audience with live polls, Q&A sessions,
and quizzes during your presentations. There’s now a simple process for requesting a Slido for
your presentation or event. To request one, visit the Speaking Engagements and Presentations
SharePoint site, click on “Slido” in the left-hand navigation menu, and select the request button
to fill out the form.

Once submitted, you’ll receive an email to submit signed Rules of Behavior for Region 6
Employees Using Slido, and after that is completed, a Slido will be created for you based on the
details you provided. This process is designed to make it easier to enhance audience
participation in your speaking engagements.

Updating your Information in Outlook
Please take a moment to double-check your information in Microsoft Outlook. By following these
five steps you can quickly check and correct any incorrect information in the global address list
(GAL).  

1.     On the tool bar in outlook click on the Address Book button.

2.     In the search window type in your name and hit enter.

3.     You will see the name appear in the search window. Double click the name in the search
window and the properties box will open.

4.     If any of the details are incorrect you can submit a helpdesk ticket to the Region 6 IT
Customer Support Team by following this link FEMA Region 6 Self-Service click on the IT
HelpDesk icon.

 
5.     Please fill out the request form with all the correct information we will make the changes
as soon as possible. Note the changes can take up to 24 hours to take effect.

Employee Association Updates

Denton Campus Thanksgiving Feast – November 20, 2024

Thank you to all of those who attended the Thanksgiving Feast!  We hope you had a good time! 
We learned a valuable lesson in that we need to overestimate for food for next year 

Lands’ End

The best discount we offer is going on now through November 29, 2024. You can use promo
code EMTHOL35FS on your orders and receive a 35% discount on items and FREE UPS Ground
Shipping!!

Remember: Use your FEMA email address at checkout and the promotion code is case
sensitive.

https://business.landsend.com/store/dhs_fema_region_6/

Toys for Tots!

Thank you to all of those who have donated so far!  Please remember we are delivering the
Denton Campus toys on December 6, 2024. If you are interested in being part of the delivery,
please sign up here: https://forms.office.com/g/BDKbXs7GhG. Some of the boxes are already
full and there are some bicycles too, so Pick-Up trucks and large vehicles are needed.

Jeans Coupons!

Do you ever feel like being a rebel and wear jeans to work?  Well, with a Jeans Coupon and your
supervisor’s permission, you can do just that!  Each coupon is worth one day of jeans!

§  1 Coupon is $5.00

§  4 Coupons for $15.00

To get your coupon(s) visit with the following Employees Association Reps:

§  VSAB – Maryanne Campbell

§  FRC – Colleen Sciano

§  RN – Katherine Gonzalez

If I may be of any assistance, let me know.

 
 
 
Tell us how we are doing! Mission Support Feedback (office.com). 

Karina Aguilo
Division Director | Mission Support Division | Region 6
Mobile: (940) 232-8781
Iridium: 8816-224-05917
karina.aguilo@fema.dhs.gov

Federal Emergency Management Agency
fema.gov

 
 
 
 
 
 
