From:
To:

Subject:
Date:

In, Anthony
Weatherall, Micki; Washington, Anita M; Reed, Sha"Cortney; Kusy, Alma; Davis, Henry; Smith, David; Teter,
Sean; Smith , Anthony; Meindl, Max; Quinones Crespo, Joel; Solarie, Ian
FW: Public Assistance Program and Policy Guide Version 5 Headed for Public Comment
Thursday, August 8, 2024 12:08:37 PM

Team
See the email below regarding the new PAPPG if you want to provide comments.

v/r

Tony

Anthony In
Infrastructure Branch Director| Recovery Division | Region 6
Cell Number 202-615-6165
Anthony.in@fema.dhs.gov
“Humble yourself, be kind to each other and always remember to Do the Right Thing”.

Federal Emergency Management Agency
fema.gov

 WARNING:  This document is FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) and may contain PRIVACY SENSITIVE information.  Any misuse
or unauthorized access may result in both civil and criminal penalties.  It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted,
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO information.  This information shall not be
distributed beyond the original addressees without prior authorization of the originator. This communication, along with any
attachments, is covered by Federal and State law governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and legally
privileged information.  If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any
dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this message is strictly prohibited.  If you have received this in error, please reply
immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

From: Hunter, Jodi <Jodi.Hunter@fema.dhs.gov> 
Sent: Thursday, August 8, 2024 11:54 AM
To: Halbert, Brandy <brandy.halbert@fema.dhs.gov>; Bowen, Justin <Justin.Bowen@fema.dhs.gov>;
In, Anthony <anthony.in@fema.dhs.gov>; Sperry, Cheryl <Cheryl.Sperry@fema.dhs.gov>; Mckenzie,
Rachel <rachel.mckenzie@fema.dhs.gov>
Subject: FW: Public Assistance Program and Policy Guide Version 5 Headed for Public Comment

Please let you staff know that due to time restraints HQ has requested that R6 review -

Chapter 8: Permanent Work Eligibility: Permanent Work Eligibility – Pages 160-198

Any reviews/comments outside HQ’s request are fine and should be turned in…

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Thanks
Jodi

 
 
