In, Anthony
Washington, Anita M; Weatherall, Micki; Kusy, Alma; Smith, David; Quinones Crespo, Joel; Davis, Henry; Teter,
Sean; Smith , Anthony; Meindl, Max
FW: FEMA Image Metadata Tool
Friday, March 22, 2024 10:12:06 AM
FEMA Image Metadata Tool One-Page.pdf
image001.png
FEMA_Image_Metadata_Tool_v1 - Read-Only.pdf
ICYMI New Photo Page Helper Tool.msg

From:
To:

Subject:
Date:
Attachments:

Team

This is a good tool to have. Especially we can convert applicant photos with the data we need.

v/r

Tony

Anthony In
Infrastructure Branch Director| Recovery Division | Region 6
Cell Number 202-615-6165
Anthony.in@fema.dhs.gov
“Humble yourself, be kind to each other and always remember to Do the Right Thing”.

Federal Emergency Management Agency
fema.gov

 WARNING:  This document is FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) and may contain PRIVACY SENSITIVE information.  Any misuse
or unauthorized access may result in both civil and criminal penalties.  It is to be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted,
distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO information.  This information shall not be
distributed beyond the original addressees without prior authorization of the originator. This communication, along with any
attachments, is covered by Federal and State law governing electronic communications and may contain restricted and legally
privileged information.  If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any
dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this message is strictly prohibited.  If you have received this in error, please reply
immediately to the sender and delete this message. 

From: Kundrock, Christopher <christopher.kundrock@fema.dhs.gov> 
Sent: Friday, March 22, 2024 8:11 AM
To: Kundrock, Christopher <christopher.kundrock@fema.dhs.gov>
Subject: FEMA Image Metadata Tool

Good morning,

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I wanted to make everyone aware of a new FEMA approved tool that is available in the Software
Center for download. It was demoed yesterday on the HQ and Regions PDA community of practice
call. It takes the hidden metadata stored on every picture that is taken and places it on the photo;
much like when we had access to “solocator” on our FEMA devices. I’ve attached a one pager and
PowerPoint which has instructions on how to download it. This tool was created in Region 8, but has
been approved for FEMA wide use by IT. The photo page helper tool was created by the same
gentleman in Region 8 (email attached about photo page helper).  Bonus, it also seamlessly converts
apple proprietary photos ending in .heic to .jpg.

If you are involved in anything that involves receiving photos or taking photos of impacted items, I
would encourage you to investigate downloading this.

Thanks,
Chris

Chris Kundrock, MA
Supervisory Emergency Management Specialist | Regional Operations | Region 6 Public Assistance
Office: (940) 297-0197 | Mobile: (202) 856-1986
Christopher.Kundrock@fema.dhs.gov

Federal Emergency Management Agency
fema.gov

This communication, along with any attachments, is covered by federal and state law governing electronic communications and may
contain confidential and legally privileged information. If the reader of this message is not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified
that any dissemination, distribution, use or copying of this message is strictly prohibited. If you have received this in error, please reply
immediately to the sender and delete this message.

 
 
 
 
 
  
        
 
 
 
