Collective Bargaining Agreement 

Between 

Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) 

And 

American Federation of Government Employees 
(AFGE) 

Council 56 

Agreement Date: December 5, 2016 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ARTICLE 1: RECOGNITION AND COVERAGE ................................................................................. 4 

ARTICLE 2: GENERAL PROVISIONS .................................................................................................. 7 

ARTICLE 3: CADRE OF ON-CALL RESPONSE/RECOVERY EMPLOYEES ................................. 9 

ARTICLE 4: EMPLOYEE RIGHTS ...................................................................................................... 14 

ARTICLE 5: OFFICIAL TIME .............................................................................................................. 20 

ARTICLE 6: FACILITIES AND SERVICES ........................................................................................ 24 

ARTICLE 7: MANAGEMENT RIGHTS .............................................................................................. 28 

ARTICLE 8: LABOR-MANAGEMENT COOPERATION ................................................................. 29 

ARTICLE 9: IMPACT BARGAINING AND MIDTERM BARGAINING ........................................ 31 

ARTICLE 10: MERIT PROMOTION .................................................................................................. 34 

ARTICLE 11: POSITION DESCRIPTIONS & CLASSIFICATION ................................................. 38 

ARTICLE 12: OFFICIAL RECORDS ................................................................................................... 40 

ARTICLE 13: TRAINING & CAREER DEVELOPMENT ................................................................ 42 

ARTICLE 14: PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT ............................................................................ 44 

ARTICLE 15: AWARDS AND RECOGNITION................................................................................. 49 

ARTICLE 16: UNIFORMS .................................................................................................................... 51 

ARTICLE 17: WORK SCHEDULES .................................................................................................... 53 

ARTICLE 18: ABSENCE AND LEAVE ................................................................................................ 59 

ARTICLE 19: TELEWORK................................................................................................................... 65 

1 

 
ARTICLE 20: DISASTER DEPLOYMENT......................................................................................... 69 

ARTICLE 21: TRAVEL .......................................................................................................................... 70 

ARTICLE 22: DETAILS AND TEMPORARY PROMOTIONS ....................................................... 73 

ARTICLE 23: REASSIGNMENT AND RELOCATION ..................................................................... 75 

ARTICLE 24: REDUCTION-IN-FORCE AND TRANSFER OF FUNCTION ................................ 78 

ARTICLE 25: CONTRACTING OUT................................................................................................... 82 

ARTICLE 26: HEALTH AND SAFETY ............................................................................................... 83 

ARTICLE 27: FITNESS-FOR-DUTY .................................................................................................. 88 

ARTICLE 28: WORKER’S COMPENSATION .................................................................................. 90 

ARTICLE 29: TEMPORARY LIGHT DUTY ASSIGNMENTS ........................................................ 93 

ARTICLE 30: DRUG TESTING ........................................................................................................... 95 

ARTICLE 31: EMPLOYEE ASSISTANCE .......................................................................................... 96 

ARTICLE 32: VIOLENCE IN THE WORKPLACE ............................................................................ 98 

ARTICLE 33: INVESTIGATIONS ....................................................................................................... 99 

ARTICLE 34: DISCIPLINARY AND ADVERSE ACTIONS .......................................................... 101 

ARTICLE 35: GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE ...................................................................................... 106 

ARTICLE 36: ARBITRATION .......................................................................................................... 111 

ARTICLE 37: ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION (ADR) ............................................... 115 

ARTICLE 38: EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY ............................................................ 117 

ARTICLE 39: PARKING AND TRANSPORTATION ................................................................... 119 

2 

 
ARTICLE 40: DUES WITHHOLDING............................................................................................. 121 

ARTICLE 41: DURATION OF AGREEMENT ................................................................................ 124 

3 

 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 1: RECOGNITION AND COVERAGE 

SECTION 1.  PREAMBLE 
This Agreement is entered into, by and between the U.S. Department of Homeland Security 
(DHS), Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), and American Federation of 
Government Employees (AFGE), AFL-CIO.  Collectively, FEMA and AFGE shall hereafter be 
referred to as "the Parties."  This Agreement constitutes a Collective Bargaining Agreement 
between the Agency and the Union. 

SECTION 2.  COOPERATIVE RELATIONSHIP 
The Agency and the Union agree that a constructive and cooperative working relationship 
between labor and management is essential to achieving the Agency’s mission and to ensuring a 
quality work environment for employees.  The parties further recognize that this relationship 
must be built on a solid foundation of trust, mutual respect, and shared responsibility for 
organizational success.  The parties therefore agree to work together to identify problems and 
craft solutions, enhance productivity, and deliver the best quality of federal disaster assistance 
services and resources to the nation.   

SECTION 3.  EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATION 

A.  The Federal Emergency Management Agency (hereafter referred to as the "Agency," or 

“FEMA” or "management”) recognizes the American Federation of Government 
Employees, National Council 56, (hereafter referred to as the "Union” or “Council”) as 
the exclusive representative of employees identified by the Federal Labor Relations 
Authority in Case No. WA-RP-13-0055.  As the exclusive representative of the 
employees in the unit, the Union is entitled to act for and represent the interests of all 
employees in the unit. 

B.  It is understood that the Union reserves the right to delegate authority to a Local 

representative to negotiate on behalf of the Union with the Agency.  This includes 
negotiations on Regional or facility-specific issues.    

C.  In the event the Union desires to address Regional or facility-specific issues, those issues 
must be brought forward by the Council President or Vice President and presented to the 
FEMA Labor Relations Officer (or designee).  In the event the Agency desires to address 
Regional or facility-specific issues, those issues must be brought forward by the FEMA 
Labor Relations Officer (or designee) and presented to the Council President or Vice 
President.  

SECTION 4.  COVERAGE 
This Collective Bargaining Agreement covers bargaining unit employees described as 
“Included” in the nine geographic unit descriptions in FLRA Case No. WA-RP-13-0055.  If the 
Union requests certification to include additional employees in the unit, and the FLRA decides to 
amend, clarify, or change the unit to include the additional employees, the additional employees 
will automatically be covered by this Agreement.  The unit descriptions are as follows: 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Region II, New York, New York 
Included:  

Excluded:  

All full-time and part-time permanent employees and all nonprofessional 
CORE employees employed by Region II, Federal Emergency 
Management Agency. 
All other temporary employees; employees in the position of Public 
Affairs Specialist, GS-1035-12/13; management officials; supervisors; and 
employees described in 5 U.S.C. § 7112(b)(2), (3), (4), (6) and (7). 

Region III, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 
Included:  

Excluded:  

All non-professional permanent full-time and part-time employees of the 
Federal Emergency Management Agency, Region III, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania. 
All temporary employees, including all employees appointed under the 
Stafford Act, and all professional employees, management officials, 
supervisors, and employees described in 5 U.S.C. § 7112(b)(2), (3), (4), 
(6), and (7). 

Region IV, Atlanta, Georgia 
Included:  

All professional and non-professional, full-time and part-time permanent 
employees employed by Region IV Atlanta, and located in Thomasville, 
Georgia and Atlanta, Georgia. 

Excluded:   Management officials, supervisors, and employees described in 5 U.S.C. 

7112(b)(2), (3), (4), (6), and (7). 

Region V, Chicago, Illinois   
Included:  

Excluded:  

All professional and non-professional employees of the Federal 
Emergency Management Agency, Region V, Chicago, Illinois. 
All management officials, supervisors, and employees described in 5 
U.S.C. § 7112(b)(2), (3), (4), (6), and (7). 

Region VII, Kansas City, Missouri  
Included:  

Excluded:  

All professional and non-professional employees of the Federal 
Emergency Management Agency, Region VII, Kansas, City, Missouri. 
Disaster Assistance Employees (DAE); management officials; supervisors; 
and employees described in 5 USC 7112(b)(2), (3), (4), (6), and (7). 

Region IX, San Francisco, California 
Included:  

Excluded: 

All professional and non-professional general schedule employees of the 
Federal Emergency Management Agency, Region 9. 
Temporary employees; management officials; supervisors; and employees 
described in 5 U.S.C. 7112(b)(2), (3), (4), (6), and (7). 

FEMA Headquarters 
Included:  

All professional and nonprofessional General Schedule and Wage Grade 
employees employed by Headquarters Federal Emergency Management 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Excluded:  

Agency, including employees stationed outside the Washington, D.C. 
Metropolitan Area who are assigned to Headquarters. 
All management officials, supervisors, part-time employees, temporary 
employees, management interns, professional general schedule employees 
of the software Design and Engineering Division, Operations and Support 
Directorate located in Charlottesville, Virginia, all other employees 
represented by any other labor organization, and employees described in 
Section 7112(b)(2), (3), (4), (6), and (7) of the Statute. 

Emmitsburg, Maryland 
Included:  

All professional and nonprofessional employees employed by the 
Department of Homeland Security, Federal Emergency Management 
Agency and whose duty station is at the National Emergency Training 
Center in Emmitsburg, Maryland. 

Excluded:    All management officials, supervisors, employees described in 5 U.S.C. § 
7112(b)(2), (3), (4), (6), and (7), and temporary employees with less than 
90 day appointments. 

Mt. Weather, Virginia 
Included:  

All nonsupervisory GS, WG, and WAE’s non-professional employees 
employed by the Federal Emergency Management Agency located at the 
Special Facility; employees located at the four field offices under the 
Office of Operations Support, Systems Operations Division; employees of 
the Office of Operations Support, Computer Services Division and 
Systems Development Division located at Charlottesville, VA; and 
employees of the Office of Operations Support, Computer Model 
Division, Resource Data Base Branch and the Vulnerabilities Analysis 
Branch located at the Central Office, Federal Emergency Management 
Agency. 
Supervisors, management officials, temporary employees with no 
reasonable expectancy of continued employment, and employees 
described in 5 USC 7112(b)(2), (3), (4), (6), and (7).   

Excluded:  

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 2: GENERAL PROVISIONS 

SECTION 1.  RELATIONSHIP TO LAWS AND GOVERNMENT-WIDE RULES AND 
REGULATIONS 

A.  In the administration of all matters covered by this Agreement, the Parties shall be 

governed by existing and future laws, Government wide rules and regulations in effect on 
the date this Agreement becomes effective, and by subsequently enacted government-
wide rules and regulations implementing 5 U.S.C. § 2302.  Should any conflict arise 
between this Agreement and any such laws or regulations, the provisions of such laws or 
regulations shall supersede conflicting provisions of this Agreement. 

B.  Any DHS or FEMA directives or policies in effect as of the effective date of this 

Agreement govern the working conditions of the Parties, unless it conflicts with the terms 
of this Agreement. 

SECTION 2.  PAST PRACTICES 

A.  Past practices that conflict with law, government wide rule or regulation or this 

Agreement shall terminate upon the effective date of this Agreement. 

B.  In order to change any past practices that are not in conflict with law, government wide 

rule or regulation or this Agreement, the Agency or Union shall provide notice and, upon 
request, bargain with the other party to the extent required under the Statute and in 
accordance with the mid-term bargaining provisions of this Agreement. 

SECTION 3.  OTHER AGREEMENTS 
All previously negotiated agreements and understandings (MOAs and MOUs) between the 
Parties which were in effect prior to this Agreement at any level shall automatically expire upon 
the effective date of this Agreement unless expressly identified and incorporated in this 
Agreement.   

SECTION 4.  SEVERABILITY 
Should any part of this Agreement or any provisions contained herein be rendered or declared 
invalid by reason of any changes in law, government wide rules or regulations, or court order, 
such provision or provisions may be severed from the rest of this Agreement, which shall remain 
in full force and effect. 

SECTION 5.  FEMA INSTRUCTIONS, POLICIES, AND MANUALS 

A.  Copies of all FEMA Instructions, Policies, and Manuals will be accessible to employees 

on line via the FEMA Intranet.  

B.  Wherever a FEMA instruction, policy, or manual is referenced in this Agreement, it shall 
only apply to the bargaining unit members identified in the Applicability and Scope 
section of the cited instruction, policy, or manual. 

C.  Before a change to any FEMA instruction, policy, or manual in effect on the effective 
date of this Agreement, or a new instruction, policy, or manual will be applicable to 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
bargaining unit members, the Agency shall provide notice and, upon request, bargain 
with the Union to the extent required by law and in accordance with the mid-term 
bargaining provisions of this Agreement.  Any agreement reached between the Parties on 
the changed or new instruction, policy, or manual will be incorporated as a modified 
article or an Appendix to this Agreement or memorialized in a Memorandum of 
Agreement (MOA). 

D.  The Agency will ensure that any electronic links in this Agreement are functional.  If 

there is a problem with a link, please contact Enterprise Service Desk (ESD) at FEMA-
Enterprise-Service-Desk@fema.dhs.gov and the FEMA Labor Relations Officer.    

SECTION 6.    DEFINITIONS  

“Days” means calendar days, unless otherwise specified. 

“Employee” means bargaining unit employee, unless otherwise specified. 

“Position” means bargaining unit position, unless otherwise specified.   

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 3: CADRE OF ON-CALL RESPONSE/RECOVERY EMPLOYEES 

SECTION 1. GENERAL 

A.  The Parties agree to follow the policies and procedures set forth in FEMA Manual 252-

11-1, Cadre of On-Call Response/Recovery Employee (CORE) Program, dated 
8/25/2015, except as otherwise provided in this Agreement. 

B.  FEMA’s most valuable resource is its workforce; both permanent and temporary 

employees who are focused on and committed to prepare for, prevent, respond to, and 
recover from all-hazards incidents. FEMA relies upon its temporary personnel, in 
particular, to carry out its role in incident management and support operations and to 
augment FEMA’s permanent workforce. 

SECTION 2.  APPOINTMENTS 

A.  COREs are hired under a Stafford Act appointment authority and their salaries and 
benefits are funded by the DRF, thus the scope of their duties must predominately 
carryout Stafford Act activities. 

B.  Individuals appointed to CORE positions are normally given time-limited appointments 
for a period of not less than two years (unless otherwise justified for less than two years 
based on workload analyses) but not to exceed four years, unless the appointment is 
renewed for another term.  

C.  A CORE appointment does not confer eligibility or priority consideration for a permanent 

appointment. 

D.  COREs must be ready to deploy wherever FEMA needs their services and have 24 hours 
to respond to a deployment order and may be required to work long hours under stressful 
and unfavorable conditions. 

E.  All CORE appointees are required to sign a Conditions of Employment (COE) statement 
upon appointment, and upon renewal of an appointment.  COEs contain significant, but 
not all of, the DHS/FEMA and other rules and regulations that COREs must abide by. 

F.  CORE employees will be given at least 30 days’ notice in writing if their appointment 

will not be renewed. 

SECTION 3.  ELIGIBILITY FOR RECRUITMENT, RELOCATION, OR RETENTION 
INCENTIVES 

A.  In order to enhance the recruitment and retention of COREs, the following incentives 

may be provided to COREs at the discretion of management: 

1.  Recruitment Incentive.  A recruitment incentive is a one-time, lump-sum 

payment to a newly appointed CORE to a position that is determined to be 
critical to FEMA’s mission and in the absence of the incentive, would be difficult 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to fill. 

2.  Relocation Incentive.  A relocation incentive is a one-time, lump-sum payment to 

a current CORE who agrees to relocate with no break in service to accept a 
FEMA position in a different geographic area if the position is likely to be 
difficult to fill in the absence of the incentive. 

3.  Retention Incentive.  A retention incentive is paid to a current CORE if the 

CORE has unusually high or unique qualifications, or an Office or Directorate 
has a special need for the CORE’s services that makes it essential to retain the 
CORE, and the CORE would likely leave the Federal service in the absence of a 
retention incentive. 

B.  The use of a recruitment, relocation, or retention incentive is not to be used as a substitute 
for traditional recruiting efforts that could yield a competent and qualified employee 
without the use of such an incentive. 

SECTION 4.  MERIT-BASED INCREASES UNDER PAY BANDS 

A.  A CORE who is not already receiving the maximum basic pay for his or her position may 

receive a merit-based increase at the conclusion of the performance year. 

B.  A CORE must receive at least a rating of record of “Achieved Expectations” or 

equivalent to be eligible for a merit-based increase. 

SECTION 5.  STEP INCREASES UNDER GRADES AND STEP 

A.  A CORE who is not already at the highest step of his or her current grade may be 

advanced to the next higher step at the conclusion of the waiting period assigned to their 
current rate. 

1.  While FEMA’s Stafford Act authorities permit FEMA the authority to 

compensate without regard to Title 5, FEMA agrees to adopt the waiting periods 
for advancement to the next highest step established by 5 U.S.C. § 5335 and its 
implementing regulation at 5 C.F.R. § 531.405 as a matter of policy for all 
COREs paid via grades and steps. 

2.  A CORE is not automatically entitled to receive a step increase at the conclusion 
of his or her waiting period.  To receive the step increase, the CORE’s supervisor 
of record must certify that the CORE: 

a.  Has completed the requisite waiting period; 
b.  Has not received an equivalent increase during the waiting period; and 
c.  His or her summary rating level for the most recent performance was at 

least “Achieved Expectations” or equivalent. 

3.  If a supervisor determines that a CORE’s performance is not at an acceptable 
level, the CORE will receive a notification stating that the CORE’s next step 
increase is being withheld, the reason for the negative determination, and what 
the CORE must do to improve his or her performance to be granted the step 
increase.  The notification will include a notice that bargaining unit employees 
can consult with a Union representative. 

B.  Prior to the completion of the requisite waiting period, a supervisor may recommend one 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
additional step increase if warranted by the CORE’s performance.  

SECTION 6.  BENEFITS AVAILABLE TO CORES 

A.  With certain exceptions that apply to individuals such as reemployed annuitants, COREs  

are eligible for the following benefits: 

1.  Federal Employees Health Benefits (FEHB),  
2.  Federal Employees Dental/Vision Insurance Program (FEDVIP),  
3.  Federal Employees Group Life Insurance (FEGLI),  
4.  Federal Employees Retirement System (FERS),  
5.  Flexible Spending Account (FSA),  
6.  Federal Long Term Care Insurance (FLTCIP), and, 
7.  The Thrift Savings Plan (TSP). 

B.  COREs must review their benefit options and make selections within prescribed election 
periods. The Agency will provide timely information to COREs with regard to available 
benefit options, election periods, and technical direction regarding how to apply for these 
options. 

C.  Employee Assistance Program -- COREs have access to confidential work life 

enhancement services through the EAP, free of charge.  The EAP is a professional 
resource available to help COREs resolve life challenges.  EAP information will be 
posted on the FEMA intranet site.   

D.  Transit Subsidy -- Subject to the availability of funds, all COREs who are currently using 

public transportation to commute to work are eligible for transit subsidy benefits.  
COREs interested in receiving a transit subsidy must complete FEMA Form 254-1-1, 
Public Transportation Benefit Program Application, and email it to the Transit Subsidy 
Program at FEMA-Transit-Subsidy@fema.dhs.gov. 

E.  Awards & Recognition -- The Awards and Recognition program applicable to Title 5 

employees and captured in FEMA Manual 255-4-1 is also applicable to COREs, with the 
exception of CORE-Is.  Awards and recognition policy applicable to CORE-I IMATs is 
found in FD 010-7, Incident Management Assistance Team (IMAT) Program Directive. 

F.  Absence & Leave -- FEMA administratively applies the FEMA Absence and Leave 

Policy to COREs, with the exception of CORE-Is, whose absence and leave policies are 
governed by FD 010-7, Incident Management Assistance Team (IMAT) Program 
Directive. 

SECTION 7.  TELEWORK 
FM 123-9-1, Telework Manual, applies to all COREs.  To establish a telework agreement a 
CORE must submit a copy of FEMA Form 123-9- 0-1, Telework Application and Agreement 
Form, and FEMA Form 123-9-0-2, Employee Self-Certification Safety and Health Checklist, to 
his or her supervisor of record for approval. 

SECTION 8.  MISCONDUCT & POOR PERFORMANCE 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A.  COREs are non-Title 5 employees and therefore normally do not have appeal rights to the 

Merit Systems Protection Board.  

B.  COREs included within the bargaining unit have the right to grieve reprimands, 

suspensions, and annual appraisal (rating of record) following the procedures outlined in 
the Grievance and Arbitration Articles of this Agreement.   

C.  COREs are not placed on formal Performance Improvement Plans (PIPs). 

D.  When deployed to a disaster for twenty days or more, a CORE qualified in a FQS 
position, and deployed to that position, will receive an evaluation of the CORE’s 
deployment performance.  This deployment evaluation may be considered by the 
CORE’s supervisor of record when completing a CORE’s progress review and annual 
appraisal (rating of record). 

SECTION 9.  ALLEGATIONS OF DISCRIMINATION 
If a CORE wishes to raise allegations of discrimination, he or she may contact the Office of 
Equal Rights for appropriate guidance on the EEO complaint process or file a grievance 
following the procedures outlined in the Grievance Article. 

SECTION 10.  RIGHTSIZING 

A.  Although COREs are not subject to any statutory or regulatory protection afforded by 
reduction-in-force provisions, COREs covered by this Agreement are covered by 
rightsizing protections of this Section. 

B.  When FEMA requires reductions in staff levels in one or more functional areas due to a 
lack of work or funding, FEMA may conduct a rightsizing of its CORE workforce.  A 
rightsizing may occur when the Agency anticipates needing fewer positions through the 
annual workload analysis and staffing plan process, or if an immediate need to reduce 
positions or workload is realized between annual workload analyses. 

C.  Rightsizing results in termination of appointment prior to the expiration date of an 

appointment, unless the CORE is selected for or is reassigned to another vacant position 
in FEMA. 

D.  FEMA will issue both general and specific notice of upcoming rightsizing efforts that 

will affect COREs. 

1.  General Advance Notice. COREs will be given a 30 calendar day advance official 
notification concerning decisions which may result in their being affected by a 
rightsizing effort.  This notification will be in writing and will include: the reasons 
for the rightsizing effort, such as lack of work or funds, reorganization, or a 
realignment of functions; and, whom to contact about assistance available for 
affected employees. 

2.  Specific Notice. Specific written notice of separation will be issued to individual 
affected COREs prior to the proposed date of their release.  FEMA’s goal is to 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
provide notice no less than 30 calendar days from their date of release unless 
extenuating circumstances dictate a shorter notice period.  

13 

 
 
 
ARTICLE 4: EMPLOYEE RIGHTS 

SECTION 1.  GENERAL 

A.  In an atmosphere of mutual respect, all employees shall be treated fairly and equitably 
and without discrimination in regard to their political affiliation, Union activity, race, 
color, religion, national origin, gender, sexual orientation, marital status, age, or non-
disqualifying handicapping conditions irrespective of the work performed or grade 
assigned.  Employees will also be afforded proper regard for and protection of their 
privacy and constitutional rights.  It is therefore agreed that the Agency will endeavor to 
establish working conditions that are conducive to enhancing and improving employee 
morale and efficiency. 

B.  Recognizing that productivity is enhanced when morale is high, managers, supervisors, 
Union representatives, and employees shall endeavor to treat one another with respect 
and dignity. 

C.  An employee who exercises any statutory or contractual right shall not be subjected to 

reprisal or retaliation, and shall be treated fairly and equitably. 

D.  All Agency employees may give suggestions and ideas to make the Agency a better 

workplace and enable the Agency to better serve the public.  

SECTION 2.  PERSONAL RIGHTS 
Employees shall have the right to direct and fully pursue their private lives and exercise their 
constitutional rights and personal beliefs without interference, coercion, retaliation or 
discrimination by the Agency so long as such activities do not conflict with job responsibilities 
or applicable laws. 

SECTION 3.  RIGHTS TO UNION MEMBERSHIP AND REPRESENTATION 
Pursuant to 5 USC 7102, employees covered by this Agreement shall have the right to form, join, 
or assist any labor organization, or to refrain from any such activity, freely and without fear of 
penalty or reprisal, and each employee shall be protected in the exercise of such right. 

SECTION 4.  RIGHT TO DISCUSS REPRESENTATIONAL MATTERS 

A.  If an employee wishes to discuss a representational matter with a Union representative on 
duty time, the employee shall submit an advanced written request to his/her manager to 
be released from duty.  The request must specify the time it will take to hold the 
discussion, identify the Union representative and location. 

B.  If the discussion will take place away from the worksite, the employee shall identify the 

location where he/she can be contacted. 

C.  The manager (his/her designee or second-line manager, in the event of the absence of the 
manager) will release the employee from duty unless the manager determines that the 
presence of the employee at the worksite is necessary to meet current or immediate work 
requirements. 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION 5.  INVESTIGATORY EXAMINATIONS (WEINGARTEN) 

A.  In accordance with 5 U.S.C. § 7114(a)(2)(B), the Agency will provide the Union the 
opportunity to be represented at any examination of an employee in the unit by a 
representative of the  Agency in connection with an investigation if: 

1.  The employee reasonably believes that the examination may  result in disciplinary 

action against the employee; and 
2.  The employee requests representation. 

B.  Not every management initiated discussion is an investigatory interview that triggers an 

employee’s “Weingarten” rights.  For example, a supervisor may: 

1.  Talk to an employee about the proper way to perform an assignment; 
2.  Conduct a performance evaluation; 
3.  Issue a verbal warning; or 
4.  Deliver a decision already made. 

C.  An employee may invoke “Weingarten” rights (i.e., request that a Union representative 
be present) when the employee reasonably believes that an investigatory interview is 
likely to result in disciplinary action.  After the employee makes a request for Union 
representation, the manager can: 

1.  Grant the employee’s request for a Union representative, and wait a reasonable 

amount of time for the Union representative to arrive; 

2.  Deny the employee’s request for a Union representative, and end the meeting 

immediately; or 

3.  Give the employee the choice of either: 
a.  Ending the meeting or 
b.  Continuing the meeting without Union representation. 

D.  The Agency will post an annual notice of “Weingarten” rights on its Intranet site. 

SECTION 6.  INFORMATION REQUESTS 
All requests for data or information pursuant to 5 USC 7114 must be submitted to the FEMA 
Labor Relations Officer (or designee) in writing from the Council President or Union 
representative previously designated by each Local.  Each Local may designate up to 2 Union 
representatives for this purpose.  The Agency will provide the requested information within 30 
days of receipt unless the Agency demonstrates a good faith basis for requiring more time, in 
which case the parties will mutually agree on a date by which the information will be provided.  

SECTION 7.  UNION REPRESENTATION AT FORMAL DISCUSSIONS 
The Union will be given the opportunity to be represented at all formal discussions as defined in 
5 U.S.C. § 7114(a)(2)(A).  The Agency will notify the Union as far in advance of the formal 
discussion as is reasonably possible under the circumstances.  After notification, the Union will 
inform the Agency if a Union representative will attend and provide the name of the designated 
Union representative.  Failure to designate a Union representative in advance does not preclude a 
Union representative from participating in the meeting.  If a representative does attend, the 
Union representative will introduce themselves to the person(s) running the meeting prior to the 

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
start of the meeting.  If requested, the Union representative will be provided an opportunity to 
introduce themselves at the start of the formal discussion.  The Union representative will be 
given an opportunity to participate in the meeting.  When participating as a representative of the 
Union, the Union representative will announce that they are speaking on behalf of the Union.  
However, the Union representative will not interfere with or disrupt the meeting or its purpose.  
The Agency is under no obligation to delay the start of the meeting if the Union representative is 
not present.  

SECTION 8.  WHISTLEBLOWER PROTECTION 
In accordance with 5 U.S.C. § 2302(b)(8) and the Whistleblowers Enhancement Act of 2012, 
employees will be protected against reprisal for the disclosure of information which the 
employee reasonably believes evidences a violation of any law, rule, or regulation, or gross 
mismanagement, a gross waste of funds, an abuse of authority, or a substantial and specific 
danger to public health or safety. 

SECTION 9.  WARRANTS AND SUBPOENAS  
If an employee is served with a warrant or subpoena, it will be done in private to the extent the 
Agency has knowledge of and can exercise control over the service. 

SECTION 10.  UNLAWFUL ORDERS 
An employee has the right to refuse orders that would require the employee to violate an 
applicable law.  The employee will promptly bring his/her specific concerns to the supervisor or 
appropriate Agency official.  The Agency official will consider the employee’s concern and 
promptly notify the employee whether the order is lawful or unlawful.  If the employee raises 
their concern in writing the Agency will provide a written response clarifying the order and an 
opinion regarding the legality of the order.  If circumstances do not permit this request and 
response to be done prior to carrying out the order it may be done as soon as practical thereafter. 
Refusal to obey an unlawful order will not subject the employee to disciplinary or adverse action.  
Refusal to obey a lawful order may subject the employee to disciplinary or adverse action. 

SECTION 11.  COMPENSATION 

A.  All employees are entitled to timely receipt of all wages earned in accordance with 

government-wide regulations.  Employees are responsible for reviewing their leave and 
earnings statements in WebTA or the Employee Personal Page (myEPP) and notifying 
their managers of any unexplained changes or irregularities. 

B.  All employees are required to use direct deposit for salary payment unless the employee 

meets the requirements for waiver under 31 C.F.R. § 208. 

C.  Employees who do not receive timely wages may request special salary pay.  If 

appropriate, a special pay payment will be issued promptly after notification by the 
employee to the Agency’s Human Resources Office at FEMA-HC-
Payroll@fema.dhs.gov.  Obtaining a special pay payment under false pretenses may 
serve as the basis for disciplinary action. 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION 12. PUBLIC SAFETY OFFICER BENEFIT PROGRAM 
The Public Safety Officer Benefit Program (administered by the Department of Justice) provides 
death and education benefits to survivors of fallen law enforcement officers, firefighters, and 
other first responders, as well as disability benefits to officers catastrophically injured in the line 
of duty.  The Agency shall make available to all employees information describing the PSOB 
program and contact information. 

SECTION 13. VOLUNTARY ACTIVITIES 
Employee participation in the Combined Federal Campaign, Blood Donor Drives, or other 
worthy projects will be on a voluntary basis.  This does not preclude giving general publicity and 
encouragement to employees to participate.  Participation or nonparticipation will not advantage 
or disadvantage employees.  

SECTION 14.  RETIREMENT 

A.  An employee’s decision to resign or retire will be made freely and in accordance with 

applicable law and Government-wide rule or regulation.  The Agency agrees to provide 
retirement seminars, free of charge, to employees who are within five (5) years of 
retirement eligibility.  Employees also will not be required to take leave to attend these 
Agency-sponsored seminars and are authorized to attend no more than one in a 12-month 
period. 

B.  If an Agency on-site retirement seminar is not being offered in a given calendar year, or 
an employee for legitimate reasons is not able to attend an Agency offered on-site 
seminar in the calendar year, the employee may attend a local federally-sponsored 
retirement seminar without charge to leave.  Any cost of that seminar will be at the 
expense of the employee.  Managerial approval is required and will be based on workload 
exigencies. 

C.  For planning purposes, employees who are eligible for retirement are encouraged to 

inform their managers as early as possible regarding their anticipated date of retirement; 
however, the parties understand that an employee’s decisions regarding retirement are 
subject to change at the sole discretion of the employee.   

D.  An employee may request to withdraw a retirement application at any time prior to its 
effective date.  However, an employee may not withdraw a retirement application after 
the effective date. 

E.  Badge and Credential upon Retirement for Police Officers 

1.  A Mount Weather Police Officer separating from service as a qualified retried law 
enforcement officer, as defined in the Law Enforcement Officers Safety Act 
(LEOSA), may request a retirement police credential in accordance with LEOSA.  
All costs associated with the retirement badge are to be paid by the employee or 
other private funds and may not be charged to FEMA funds.  

2.  The following criteria must be met by retiring officers in order to be considered in 

good standing:  

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a.  Officer is retiring after serving as a law enforcement officer for at least 10   
years or for medical reasons (e.g. disability retirement) after completing any 
applicable probationary period; 

b. Officer is eligible to receive retirement benefits upon retirement; and 
c.  Officer was not terminated.  

3.  Eligible retiring officers requesting a retirement badge must submit a written 

request through the chain of command to the Chief of Police along with funding, 
no later than 90 days prior to the officer’s retirement date. 

SECTION 15.  SENIORITY  
Seniority will be defined as an employee’s service computation date (SCD) as shown on their 
most recent USDA FORM AD-334 “Statement of Earnings and Leave.”  If the SCD’s are the 
same, the higher numeral in the SSN will be used as a tiebreaker, starting with the first digit (if 
the first digits in two SSN’s are 8 and 6, 8 gets preference). 

SECTION 16.  PROBATIONARY EMPLOYEES 
Employees hired under Title 5, who are in their probationary or trial period, are entitled to all 
rights contained in this Article, consistent with law and regulation, including but not limited to, 
the right to Union representation and the right to regular counseling and support from their 
supervisors.   

SECTION 17. COUNSELINGS FOR MISCONDUCT/PERFORMANCE 
Misconduct and performance counseling will be conducted privately in such a way to avoid 
embarrassment to the employees.  This principle will help guide the Agency determine who will 
attend the meetings.  

SECTION 18: FIREFIGHTER  LIVING QUARTERS 

A.  The Agency and the Union recognizes that living quarters in the Fire Stations  represent 

space allocated for rest, recreation, and sleeping for unit employees  and normally will not 
be used as public facilities or for public training. 

B.  The Agency agrees to extend the same considerations to the living conditions  in the Fire 
Stations as is extended to other living quarters when utilities and/or  appliances break 
down or need replacing. Maintenance problems will be called to  the attention of the on-
duty officer who will insure that maintenance is notified. In  cases of health and hygiene 
(e.g. toilet, sink, shower problems), management shall request that maintenance address 
the problem as an immediate priority. 

C.  The Agency recognizes the necessity of providing and maintaining reasonably 

comfortable living spaces at each station for unit employees on duty, such as air 
conditioning and heating, and adequate furniture, drapes, or blinds as required. To this 
end, the Employer agrees to provide and replace as needed the following: 

1.  Refrigeration for storage of employee's food; 
2.  Cooking and eating utensils, including, but not limited to: a dishwasher, pots,  can 
openers, coffee maker, toaster, microwave oven, broiler, glasses, plates,  bowls, 
forks, spoons, and knives; 

18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.  Adequate and suitable lounge furniture; 
4.  Modern multi-media equipment, as required for training and 

recreational  purposes; and 

5.  Adequate living accommodations. 

19 

 
 
 
ARTICLE 5: OFFICIAL TIME 

SECTION 1.  OFFICIAL TIME PURPOSE 
For purposes of this Article, “official time” means time granted by the Agency to employees 
designated in writing to act as Union representatives, without charge to leave, in accordance with 
5 U.S.C. § 7131. 

SECTION 2.  USE OF OFFICIAL TIME.  
Union representatives may use official time to conduct representational functions where such is 
authorized pursuant to, and consistent with, applicable statutes, regulations, and executive orders 
relating to complaints, grievances, appeals and other matters involving dealings with Agency 
officials.  The following list is not intended to be all inclusive, but instead is intended to provide 
examples of situations where official time may be authorized.   

A.  Representational activities  

1.  To prepare for and represent employees in grievances, arbitrations, statutory 

appeals, investigations, and misconduct and performance actions.   

2.  To attend formal discussion and investigatory meetings. 
3.  To prepare a reconsideration statement in connection with the denial of a within-

grade increase. 

4.  To meet with an AFGE National staff representative who has been designated to 
represent the Union in a grievance, arbitration, or Unfair Labor Practice (ULP) 
charge and for which the agency is a party. 

5.  To participate in a Federal Labor Relations Authority investigation or hearing as a 

representative of the Union when the Agency is a party to the matter. 

B.  Midterm Negotiation 

1.  The meet with Agency officials to discuss changes to conditions of employment.  

C.  Ongoing Labor Management Relations 

1.  To serve on any Agency committees or teams on which there is Union 

representation.   

2.  To prepare and maintain records and reports required of the Union by the Agency 

or by other Federal oversight entity. 

3.  Engage in communication with the Agency related to the administration of this 

Agreement.  

4.  To attend training pursuant to Section 6.   
5.  To attend any other meeting which the Agency and the Union agree are mutually 

beneficial.  

SECTION 3. UNION REPRESENTATIVES 

A.  The Union agrees to provide the Office of the Chief Component Human Capital 
(OCCHCO) Labor Relations Officer (LRO) with a written listing of its Union 
representative(s) along with their individual Council and Local union titles no later than 
30 days after the effective date of this Agreement.  Changes will be submitted to the 
OCCHCO LRO not less than five (5) workdays prior to the assumption of 
representational responsibilities by any new representative(s).  Each list will include the 

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
name, Union title, local, duty location and telephone number of each designated union 
representative. 

B.  Except where explicitly provided, this Agreement shall not be interpreted in any manner 
which interferes with the Union’s right to designate representatives of its own choosing 
on any particular representational matter.  If the Union utilizes the services of outside 
counsel or other representative as its representative in a grievance, arbitration, or other 
dispute, such counsel or other representative is bound by Agency policy, regulation, and 
this Agreement regarding access to operations, facilities, services and security.  Once 
designated, such counsel shall be viewed by the Agency as having full authority to 
commit the Union to a course of action unless the Union specifically states otherwise in 
writing. 

SECTION 4.  OFFICIAL TIME ALLOCATION 

A.  Union representatives may be authorized reasonable official time deducted from a bank 
of official time hours to perform functions outlined in this Agreement.  A bank of 7,900 
hours of official time per calendar year will be made available for all representational 
duties.    

B.  The Council President (and anyone officially designated to act in the role of Council 

President if the Council President is on leave or otherwise not in a duty status) will be 
allocated no more than 2080 bank hours per calendar year.  No other representative may 
use more than 1040 bank hours of official time per calendar year. 

C.  Use of official time may be authorized provided sufficient representational activities 

exist, the amount of official time requested is reasonable, and the representative complies 
with the official time request procedures outlined in Section 5 and Section 6.  

SECTION 5.  REQUIRED PROCEDURES 

A.  A Union representative planning to use official time will, in advance of such usage, 

request and receive approval from his or her manager to be released from duty to perform 
representational duties.  Requests shall be submitted via email or electronic system to 
their immediate supervisor or appropriate management official.   

B.  The request must contain: 

1.  Amount of official time requested; 
2.  The date and time official time will be used; 
3.  Type of representational activity; 
4.  Confirmation that the employee is listed on a bargaining unit list or confirmation 

from Labor Relations that the employee is a bargaining unit member.   

5.  And confirmation that the represented employee’s supervisor has been notified, if 

the meeting will take place during duty hours 

C.  The supervisor will promptly consider the request and will grant the request unless the 
supervisor determines the representative’s presence at his/her work site is necessary to 
meet Agency work requirements.  The request will be approved or denied in writing.  If 

21 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
requests are approved, Union representatives will record their official time using WebTA 
(or successor system).  If the supervisor determines the representative’s presence is 
necessary to meet Agency work requirements, the supervisor will ensure that the 
representative will be granted enough time to find an alternate or identify an alternative 
mutually agreeable day and time for departure.  Notwithstanding the provisions of this 
section the union representative may be recalled to duty if necessary.   

D.  Employee’s Supervisory Approval.  The Union representative and/or employee involved 
shall obtain advanced approval of the represented employee’s supervisor for any meeting 
during the employee’s duty time. 

E.  If there is an issue with advanced approval of official time, the Union or Supervisor may 

contact FEMA Labor Relations Officer for assistance/guidance.   

SECTION 6.  OFFICIAL TIME FOR TRAINING 

A.  Official time may be authorized for Union representatives to attend training approved by 
the Agency which is designed to advise representatives on matters within the scope of 
Civil Service Reform Act of 1978, which are of mutual interest to the Agency and the 
Union.  Training under this section will generally cover such areas as contract 
administration, handling of statutory actions such as grievances, appeals, FLRA and other 
third party processes and information related to Federal personnel/labor relations laws, 
regulations, and procedures.   

B.  The request for official time to attend Union sponsored training will be submitted in 

writing on behalf of the officers/stewards by the Union to the officer/steward’s supervisor 
and the FEMA Labor Relations Officer.  The request must be submitted at least 10 days 
before the date of the training.  At a minimum, the request must contain: 

1.  Representative’s Name: 
2.  Official title the employee holds in the Union; 
3.  Purpose of the training; 
4.  Copy of the agenda, course curriculum, or description of the training session; 
5.  Number of hours requested; and 
6.  Date(s) the employee is to attend the session. 

C.  The request will be approved or denied in writing.  If requests are approved, Union 

representatives will record their official time using WebTA (or successor system).  If 
requests to use official time for union training are denied, union representatives may 
request to use leave to attend the training. 

SECTION 7.  RESTRICTION ON OFFICIAL TIME 

A.  This Article does not authorize official time during normal duty hours for the following 

activities: 

1.  Internal Union Business.  In accordance with 5 U.S.C. § 7131(b), no official time 
may be expended for any activities performed by employees relating to internal 
Union business (including the solicitation of membership, election of Union 
officials, and collection of dues).   

22 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.  Leave.  Activities for which the employee would normally be required to charge 
his or her time to annual, sick or other appropriate leave if he or she were not a 
Union officer (e.g. annual leave for a vacation or sick leave for an illness). 

B.  Overtime is not available to Union representatives related to the use of official time.  

SECTION 8.  TRAVEL AND PER DIEM.   

A.  Any travel or per diem authorized for Union representatives under this Agreement will be 

paid in accordance with law, rule, and regulation. 

B.  Travel and per diem expenses for Union representatives or bargaining unit members 

when performing representational activities or attending Union-sponsored training shall 
be borne by the Union or the employee engaged in such activity.   

C.  Reasonable and necessary official time from the bank will be authorized for Union 

representatives for travel to and from any activities included in this Article. 

23 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 6: FACILITIES AND SERVICES 

SECTION 1.  PURPOSE 

A.  The purpose of this Article is to provide those facilities and services that are necessary 
and reasonable for the Union to carry out its legitimate activities as the exclusive 
representative of the bargaining unit.  The Parties recognize that providing such facilities 
and services furthers their joint interest in promoting effective labor-management 
relations.   

B.  The Union’s access to and use of the Agency’s facilities and services will not interfere 

with the mission or operation of the Agency. 

C.  Any and all Union communications using Agency communication resources or posted on 
Agency-provided bulletin boards will not violate the law, advocate violating the law, or 
contain items relating to partisan political matters and will not malign, disparage or harm 
the character of any individual or the Agency. 

D.  Any and all Union communications using Agency communication resources must not 

relate to any non-representational matters (e.g., internal union business). 

SECTION 2.  UNION ACCESS TO AGENCY FACILITIES 

A.  When visiting a location other than their assigned area of responsibility, Union 

representatives shall notify Agency officials of the date and time of the visit sufficiently 
in advance, but no less than two business days.  Union representatives shall not interfere 
with the work of employees during duty hours.   

B.  Meeting Space.  Upon reasonable advance request, but no less than two business days, by 
the Union, the Agency shall provide meeting space, if available, in areas occupied by the 
Agency.  The Union will comply with all security, safety and housekeeping rules in effect 
at that time and place. 

1.  During normal duty hours, confidential meeting space, if available, will be 

provided for representational duties (e.g. grievances, appeals, caucusing, and 
agreement administration). 

2.  During non-duty hours, space, if available, will be provided for internal union 
business (e.g. organizing event, elections, solicitation of membership, and 
collection of dues).  These activities will be conducted during break, lunch 
periods and non-duty hours and shall not interfere with the mission of the Agency. 

3.  If the Agency cannot accommodate the visit for valid operational reasons the 
Agency will make alternative arrangements for the union representative.   

C.  Video Teleconferencing (VTC): In addition to using communication programs available 
on Agency-issued computers, the Union may use the Agency’s VTC upon reasonable 
advance request by the Union, but no less than two business days.  The Agency shall 
provide access to VTC, if available, and no more than once a quarter.  The Union will 
comply with all security and safety rules in effect at that time and place.  

24 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.  During normal business hours (Eastern Standard Time), VTC, if available, will be 
provided for representational duties (e.g. grievances, appeals, caucusing, and 
agreement administration).   

2.  Use of VTC will be limited to no more than one hour per use. 
3.  Use of VTC will be prohibited for internal union business (e.g. elections, 

solicitation of membership, and collection of dues).  

SECTION 3.  ACCESS TO EMPLOYEES 

A.  AFGE Union representatives shall have reasonable access to unit employees during duty 
hours as necessary to carry out collective bargaining or representation duties required by 
5 U.S.C. § Chapter 71, this Agreement, or urgent circumstances.  Prior to meeting with 
the bargaining unit employees, and no less than 2 business days before, both the Union 
representative and the employee shall obtain advanced written approval from the 
employee’s supervisor.  All meetings will take place at official work sites. 

B.  Bargaining Unit List.  Upon request, but no more than quarterly, the Agency will furnish 
to the Union, for its internal use only, an electronic spreadsheet which will contain the 
names of all employees in the bargaining unit.  The Parties recognize that errors may 
occur from time-to-time in regard to input and coding of data, and that the listings will 
not be construed as action by the Agency to unilaterally deny bargaining unit status to 
any employee, or to confer it.  The Union or an individual employees may inquire with 
Labor/Employee Relations regarding an employee’s bargaining unit status.  The Agency 
will take steps to correct the Bargaining Unit Status (BUS) codes of employees 
improperly coded.   

C.  New Employee Orientation (NEO) 

1.  Two weeks prior to each NEO, the Agency will provide the Union an electronic 
spreadsheet containing the names, grades, position titles, series and official duty 
station of all bargaining unit employees scheduled to attend NEO. 
2.  The Union will provide each new employee with the name and contact 
information for a Union representative at their official duty station. 

3.  At NEO, the Agency will inform employees of the existence of AFGE Council 56 
(Union) and be told that Union briefings will be conducted at the Local level.  
4.  Local Union representatives may host a briefing of new employees to provide 

information about the Union.  This briefing will be considered a continuation of 
NEO and supervisors will allow new employees to attend this briefing.  Upon 
request, Management will identify a room that can be used for this briefing.  The 
briefing will not exceed 30 minutes and no membership solicitation activities will 
occur.     

SECTION 4.  OFFICE SPACE & EQUIPMENT  

A.  The Agency will continue to provide the Union with one private office located at the 
FEMA Headquarters building.  The Parties agree that Locals will retain current office 
space provided by the Agency, unless due to transformation to an open workspace 
environment or facility relocation that directly affects the Local office space, office space 
will no longer be available.  If office space is not available, the Agency will notify the 

25 

 
 
 
 
 
Union and both parties will meet and discuss options.  If an office will not be provided, 
the Union will be provided a functional designated workspace.  The designated 
workspace will consist of Union designated lockable file cabinet(s), a desk, chairs, and a 
telephone, for purpose of conducting representational activities for bargaining unit 
members.   

B.  Union representatives will be allowed to make reasonable use of Agency printer, copier, 
scanner, fax machines and multi-functional devices for representational purposes (e.g. 
grievances, appeals, and agreement administration). 

C.  Union representatives will be allowed to use their FEMA issued computer for Union 

representational purposes.   

SECTION 5.  ELECTRONIC MAIL 

A.  The Agency will provide Internet access to the Union for representational purposes, 
consistent with the Agency's IT policies, at individual work stations.  The Union 
representatives who are Agency employees may use the Agency e-mail system to 
communicate with employees, Agency officials, third party neutrals, and AFGE 
representatives.  The Parties agree that internal Union business (e.g. elections, solicitation 
of membership, and collections of dues) is prohibited when using government-provided 
access to the Internet and the Agency e-mail system.  Electronic mail messages on the 
Agency e-mail system are considered government records which may be accessed in 
accordance with applicable law and policies whenever a legitimate governmental purpose 
exists for doing so. 

B.  Each local and the National Council may each use the Agency’s electronic mail system 

for up to five mass emails per month.   

1.  Whenever the Union uses Agency e-mail to communicate with employees and 

Agency officials, the Union will note in the e-mail subject line that the subject of 
the communication involves “Union Communications.”  

2.  Attachments and links to external sources, are prohibited, but mass emails may 

contain links to posted internal SharePoint documents.   

3.  Use of “reply-all” function is prohibited. 

C.  Correspondence submitted through the e-mail system satisfies the official notice 

requirements under this Agreement. 

SECTION 6. MAIL 
The Agency will provide the Union use of the Agency's internal mail system to transmit or 
receive representational correspondence.  The Union agrees that use of the Agency's internal 
mail systems will be limited solely to representational matters and will not be used for internal 
mass mailings or for any internal Union business activities (including the solicitation of 
membership, election of Union officials, and collection of dues) as set forth in 5 U.S.C. § 
7131(b). 

SECTION 7.  SHARE POINT 

26 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A.  The Agency agrees to provide the Union with its own page on the Agency Intranet site 
for employee information on matters such as Union programs, benefits, and initiatives.  
The Union “home page” will be identified by an ICON or link on the main Agency 
Intranet menu/home page.  

B.  The Union will have direct access to the Agency Intranet for purposes of uploading or 

updating information on the Union’s “home page.” 

C.  The Union will at least annually provide the Agency the names of its representatives who 
may authorize and/or upload information to the Union’s home page and will update the 
list of names as needed. 

D.  The information that the Union displays on its home page must comply with this 

Agreement and DHS and FEMA IT policies.   

E.  The Union agrees to furnish a copy of any information scheduled to be posted on the 

Share Point page to the Agency’s labor relations officer at least 2 weeks in advance prior 
to posting. 

SECTION 8. UNION COMMUNICATION  

A.  Where Union bulletin boards are currently provided they will continue to be provided 

for Union use.   

B.  At any facility that does not currently have a Union bulletin board, Union may distribute 
paper (i.e., hard copy or leaflet) material in Agency facilities in worker accessible non-
work areas, such as employee lunch rooms, subject to internal security requirements.  
All such material will be properly identified as official Union material.  

C.  The Union agrees to furnish a copy of any information posted on the bulletin boards or 
distributed to the Agency labor relations officer at least 1 work day in advance prior to 
posting. 

SECTION 9.  CONTRACT AVAILABILITY 

A.  The Agency will place the Agreement on the Agency’s Intranet home page and provide 

the Council President and Local Presidents with a copy of the Agreement in the currently 
acceptable electronic format. 

B.  The Agency will make appropriate arrangements to accommodate visually-impaired 

employees. 

C.  Employees may print copies of the agreement as needed.  

27 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 7: MANAGEMENT RIGHTS 

SECTION 1.  GENERAL 
Nothing in this agreement shall affect the authority of management officials as specified in 5 
U.S.C. 7106(a): 

A.  To determine the  mission, budget, organization, number of employees, and internal 

security practices of the Agency; 

B.  To hire, assign, detail, direct, lay off, and retain employees in the Agency; or suspend, 

remove, reduce in grade or pay, or take other disciplinary action against such employees, 
in accordance with applicable laws; 

C.  To assign work, to make determinations with respect to contracting out, and to determine 

the personnel by which the Agency operations shall be conducted; 

D.  With respect to the filling of positions, to make selections for appointments from among 
properly ranked and certified candidates for promotion, or any other appropriate source; 
and 

E.  To take whatever actions may be necessary to carry out the Agency mission during 

emergencies. 

SECTION 2.  EMERGENCIES   
The Union recognizes and fully supports the Agency’s mission.  The Union further recognizes 
that to accomplish the mission it may be necessary to waive the controlling nature of this 
Collective Bargaining Agreement during the immediate preparation for, response to, or recovery 
from a Presidentially declared Major Disaster or Emergency.  In the event that a bargaining unit 
employee is deployed to or affected by a Presidentially declared Major Disaster or Emergency, 
Management may unilaterally suspend the binding nature of this agreement for a period of time.  
To effectuate the suspension Management must provide the Union with notice and an estimate of 
time which the agreement will be suspended.   

28 

 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 8: LABOR-MANAGEMENT COOPERATION 

SECTION 1.  PURPOSE AND SCOPE 

A.  The Parties recognize the importance of working closely together for the purpose of 

promoting and improving a cooperative relationship by developing meaningful solutions 
to workplace issues.  Consultation is an opportunity for the Union to review, discuss, 
consider, and make recommendations to the Agency on matters relating to or affecting 
working conditions, employee morale, and efficiency of the Agency's operations.  
Therefore, the Agency may provide the Union with briefings and the opportunity to ask 
questions about matters of interest and concern at the local levels upon Union request.   

B.  The parties agree that cooperation and communication should be a major goal of labor-
management relations.  The desire and intent in this Article therefor is to describe and 
encourage effective labor-management cooperation.  The Agency and the Union are 
committed to working together at all levels to improve service to the public, ensure a 
quality work environment for employees, and effect a more efficient administration of 
FEMA programs. 

C.  The Agency shall allow employees and their Union representatives to have pre-decisional 
involvement in all workplace matters to the fullest extent practicable, without regard to 
whether those matters are negotiable subjects of bargaining under 5 USC 7106.  The 
Agency shall provide adequate information on such matters expeditiously to Union 
representatives where not prohibited by law.  The Parties shall make a good-faith attempt 
to resolve issues concerning proposed changes in conditions of employment. 

SECTION 2.  RESOLVING UNFAIR LABOR PRACTICES 

A.  The Parties recognize the mutual benefit of attempting to resolve disputes prior to filing a 
formal Unfair Labor Practice (ULP) charge.  In order to achieve this objective, the Parties 
agree that prior to filing with the FLRA, they will work in partnership to address unfair 
labor practice allegations by bringing the matter to the attention of the other Party and 
setting a mutually agreed on timeframe to meet, investigate, and address the issue.    

B.  If the Union is the Charging Party, the Council President or designee will bring the matter 

to the attention of the FEMA Labor Relations Officer.  If the Charging Party is the 
Agency, the FEMA Labor Relations Officer will bring the matter to the attention of the 
Council President or designee.   

C.  Nothing in this Section shall replace the statutory right of either party to file a ULP unfair 

with the Federal Labor Relations Authority. 

SECTION 3. LABOR MANAGEMENT PARTNERSHIP COUNCIL  
The Parties agree to have a Labor Management Partnership Council governed by the Charter 
developed by the Parties.   

SECTION 4. LOCAL PARTNERSHIP MEETINGS 

29 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The parties encourage local partnership meetings for the purpose of promoting and facilitating 
constructive understanding and cooperative relations at the local level.  These meetings are 
intended to provide an opportunity to consult on personnel policies and practices, other working 
conditions and mutual concerns, and to engage in joint labor-management training.  Agendas 
will be submitted by the Parties at least 15 days prior to the meetings.  Meeting dates and times 
will be mutually agreed upon.  The Union and the Agency will meet in like numbers. 

SECTION 5.  JOINT LABOR – MANAGEMENT RELATIONS TRAINING 

A.  The parties agree that joint Labor-Management Relations (LMR) training is of mutual 

benefit when it covers appropriate areas (examples are: contract administration, grievance 
handling and information relating to federal personnel/labor relations laws, regulations, 
and procedures).  Scheduling arrangements for joint training will be determined locally.  
Agency personnel will be given adequate notice, to include specific agendas, of 
scheduled LMR training for maximum attendance and work schedules will be adjusted as 
needed. 

B.  The parties will jointly provide Collective Bargaining Agreement training; however, this 
does not preclude additional training by each party.  Any training documents will be 
prepared jointly.   

SECTION 6.  USE OF TIME 
Use of official time for LMPC and joint training activities will be in accordance with the agreed 
upon Official Time Article.  

SECTION 7.  EXPENSES 
When the Parties mutually agree that travel is necessary and funding is available, travel in 
support of LMPC and joint training activities shall be paid by the Agency.   

30 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 9: IMPACT BARGAINING AND MIDTERM BARGAINING 

SECTION 1.  PROPOSED CHANGES  
The Parties recognize that from time-to-time during the life of the Agreement, the need will arise 
for either party to propose changes to Agency personnel policies, practices, and/or working 
conditions, in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 7106(b)(2-3).  This covers proposed changes that might 
affect all FEMA employees or only employees at a particular Region, location or facility. 

SECTION 2.  NOTICE OF PROPOSED CHANGES  
The Proposing Party shall serve its notice of the proposed change upon the receiving Party at 
least 14 (fourteen) calendar days in advance of the proposed implementation date.  The written 
notice of the proposed change shall include a brief description of the change and the proposed 
implementation date.  All notices provided for under this Article shall be served upon the AFGE 
FEMA Council President (or designee) or FEMA Labor Relations Officer (or designee). 

SECTION 3.  DEMAND TO BARGAIN 
If the Receiving Party desires to negotiate the change, it must submit a request to bargain within 
7 (seven) calendar days after the notice of the proposed change is served.  The demand to bargain 
must include a request for a briefing and an information request if a briefing or additional 
information is desired.  If the Union submits an information request, the Agency agrees to 
provide the Union with requested data as required by 5 U.S.C. 7114(b)(4).  If the Agency 
submits an information request, the Union agrees to provide the Agency with information that is 
relevant and necessary for the Agency to understand the Union’s proposed change. 

SECTION 4.  PROPOSALS 
The Receiving Party must submit written bargaining proposals 14 (fourteen) calendar days after 
its demand to bargain, receiving a briefing, or receiving additional information, whichever is 
later.  The Receiving Party’s written bargaining proposals shall designate the Chief Negotiator.  

SECTION 5.  NEGOTIATIONS 
If the Parties are unable to reach immediate agreement on the proposed change, they shall 
commence negotiations on a mutually agreeable date and site.  Absent mutual agreement on a 
date and site for bargaining, such negotiations shall commence at the FEMA Headquarters Office 
in Washington, D.C. at 9:00 a.m. on the fourteenth (14th) calendar date following the date the 
Proposing Party received the Receiving Party’s proposals.  Once negotiations have commenced, 
the Parties recognize the obligation exists to bargain in good faith and will therefore avoid 
unnecessary delays.  If a break in negotiations is necessary the Parties will agree on a time and 
date to resume bargaining prior to any recess, whenever practicable.  Where there is mutual 
agreement that the proposed change is a National-level issue, travel and per diem will be paid by 
the Agency if the proposed change is an Agency- initiated change.  The Parties may engage in 
remote bargaining by mutual agreement.   

SECTION 6.  TIME LIMITS 
All time limits stated above may be extended by mutual consent of the parties involved.  Failure 
to make a timely demand to bargain, timely provide written proposals, or timely meet for 

31 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
negotiations shall be deemed to constitute acceptance of the changes by the Receiving Party and 
the Proposing Party may proceed to implement the proposed change. 

SECTION 7.  POST IMPLEMENTATION BARGAINING 
The Parties agree that effective management of the Agency and its resources is a mutual concern.  
The Parties also agree that on certain occasions, there may be a need for expedited 
implementation of new policies or practices affecting conditions of employment.  Nothing in this 
Article precludes management and the Union from engaging in post implementation bargaining. 

SECTION 8.  GROUND RULES FOR MIDTERM IMPACT, POST IMPLEMENTATION 
OR OTHER TYPE OF BARGAINING.   
In addition to the requirements of 5 U.S.C. § 7114(b)(1-3), the following ground rules apply to 
all bargaining entered into as a result of changes initiated by either Party and any corresponding 
obligation to bargain over such changes under 5 U.S.C. Chapter 71.  These ground rules are 
intended to supplement the procedure set forth in the Agreement, and may only be changed by 
mutual consent.  

A.  Arrangements.  Subject to Section 5 of this Article, Negotiations will be held in a suitable 
meeting room provided by management.  In the event either Party desires to caucus, 
management will caucus in a different room and will leave the negotiating room to 
accommodate caucuses by the Union.  

B.  Subject to Section 5, the starting date and the daily schedule for negotiations will be 

established by the Chief Negotiators.  

C.  During negotiations, the Chief Negotiator for each Party will signify agreement on each 
section by initialing the agreed-upon section.  The Chief Negotiator for each Party will 
retain his/her copies and will initial the other Party’s copy.  This will not preclude the 
Parties from reconsidering or revising any agreed-upon section by mutual consent.  

D.  Either team may request a caucus.  There is no limit on the number of caucuses which 

may be held; but either Party shall not caucus more than 4 (four) hours on any given day 
of negotiations.  

E.  Each Party shall be represented at the negotiations at all times by one duly authorized 
Chief Negotiator who is prepared and authorized to reach agreement on all matters 
subject to negotiations and to sign off on agreements for their respective Party. 

F.  The Union will be authorized the same number of Union representatives, but not less than 
two (2), as Agency has representatives at the negotiations table.  The designated Union 
negotiators will be on official time in accordance with Article 5, Official Time, for all 
time spent during the actual negotiations, including attendance at impasse proceedings, 
and for other related duties during negotiations, such as preparation time and time spent 
developing and drafting proposals.   

G.  If any proposal is claimed to be non-negotiable by either Party and subsequently 

determined to be negotiable, or the declaring Party withdraws its allegations of non-

32 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
negotiability, the proposal will, upon request, be reopened within a reasonable period of 
time.  Such request must be made within 7 (seven) calendar days from when the proposal 
is declared to be negotiable or the claim that the proposal is non-negotiable is withdrawn.  

H.  This procedure does not preclude the Parties from revising any proposals to overcome 
questions of scope of bargaining or duty to bargain during the period of negotiations.  

I.  All time frames in these ground rules may be modified by mutual consent. 

J.  Absent mutual agreement, the alternate work schedules and telework schedules of the 

Parties’ representatives will be converted to regular tours of duty (i.e., Monday through 
Friday) and work hours adjusted according to the agreed upon hours of negotiations.  

K.  No official transcript or electronic recordings will be made during the negotiations; 

however, each Party may be designated a note taker to keep notes and records during the 
sessions.  

L.  Observers and Subject Matter Experts (SME) shall be permitted in negotiating sessions 
only by the mutual consent of the Parties.  SMEs who are federal employees will be on 
duty time.  

M. During any bargaining, when either Party has determined that an impasse has been 

reached, the item shall be set aside.  After all negotiable items on which agreement can be 
reached have been disposed of; the Parties shall once more attempt to resolve any 
existing impasse items.  If such consideration does not resolve impasses, the assistance of 
the Federal Mediation Conciliation Service may be requested by either party.  

N.  Upon reaching an agreement, the parties will execute a Memorandum of Agreement 

(MOA).  The MOA shall not be completed and finalized until all proposals have been 
disposed of by mutual consent.  Negotiation disputes, including questions of negotiability 
and resolution of impasses, will be processed in a manner compliant with 5 U.S.C. 
Chapter 71 and implementing regulations.  This will not serve as a bar to the Parties 
concluding by mutual consent a general agreement on those items which have been or 
remain to be negotiated. 

33 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 10: MERIT PROMOTION 

SECTION 1.  GENERAL 

A.  The Parties agree to follow the policies and procedures set forth in FEMA Manual 253-

11-1, Merit Promotion and Internal Placement, dated June 23, 2015, except as otherwise 
provided in this Agreement.   

B.  The purpose of this Article is to ensure promotions and other actions, either competitive 
or noncompetitive, are made on the basis of merit, and are based on systematic and 
equitable procedures.  FEMA Manual 253-11-1 and this Article covers all permanent 
bargaining unit GS positions in the competitive service, and their Federal Wage System 
equivalents.   

C.  This Article shall be interpreted in accordance with OPM regulations.  Nothing in this 
Article shall in any way abridge the rights of the individual employee under such 
regulations, specifically, the employee's right to file a complaint. 

SECTION 2.  EXCEPTIONS  
The following actions are exceptions to competitive procedures:  

A.  A promotion resulting from the upgrading of a position without significant change in the 
duties and responsibilities due to the issuance of a new classification standard or the 
correction of an initial classification error.  

B.  A position change permitted by reduction-in-force procedures.  

C.  A promotion without current competition of an employee who was appointed in the 
competitive service from a civil service register, by direct hire, by noncompetitive 
appointment or noncompetitive conversion, or under competitive promotion procedures 
for an assignment intended to prepare the employee for the position being filled.  (This is 
a career ladder promotion, the intent of which must be made a matter of record and 
documented in the promotion plan, and which requires the employee’s current rating of 
record be “proficient” or higher.)   

D.  A promotion resulting from an employee’s position being classified at a higher grade 

based on accretion of duties and responsibilities.  

E.  A temporary promotion, or detail to a higher graded position or to a position with known 

promotion potential of 120 days or less.  

F.  Promotion to a grade previously held on a permanent basis in the competitive service 

from which the employee was separated or demoted for reasons other than performance 
or conduct.  

G.  Promotion, reassignment, demotion, transfer, reinstatement, or detail to a position having 
promotion potential no greater than the potential of a position an employee currently 

34 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
holds or previously held on a permanent basis in the competitive service and did not lose 
because of performance or conduct reasons. 

H.  Consideration of a candidate not given proper consideration in a competitive promotion 

action.  

I.  Appointments of career Senior Executive Service appointees with competitive service 

reinstatement eligibility to any position for which they qualify in the competitive service 
at any grade or salary level, including Senior-Level positions established under 5 C.F.R., 
Part 319. 

SECTION 3.  AREA OF CONSIDERATION 
The area of consideration should be sufficiently broad to ensure a reasonable number of highly 
qualified candidates for the position to be filled. Area of consideration determinations must be 
made prior to announcing the position(s), documented in the merit promotion file, and clearly 
specified in the vacancy announcement.  

SECTION 4.  VACANCY ANNOUNCEMENTS 

A.  Vacancy announcements will be open for a minimum of five calendar days and posted on 

www.USAJOBS.gov.  

B.  At a minimum, each vacancy announcement must include the following: 

1.  Agency name and the announcement number;  
2.  Opening and closing dates, including any cut-off dates, if applicable; 
3.  Position title, series, grade, bargaining unit status, and salary range;  
4.  Duty location and number of vacancies;  
5.  Promotion potential, if any;  
6.  Principal job duties;  
7.  Qualification requirements including any selective factors (if applicable);  
8.  Basis for rating, including knowledge, skills, abilities, and/or competencies;  
9.  An explanation of how to apply, including a point of contact with a telephone 

number and email address; 

10. Required application materials (e.g., resume, SF-50, DD-214);  
11. FEMA’s definition of “well-qualified,” for CTAP and ICTAP;  
12. Equal Employment Opportunity statement;  
13. Reasonable Accommodation Statement;  
14. Privacy Act Notice;  
15. Emergency Assignment Statement that reads as follows: Every FEMA employee 
has regular and recurring emergency management responsibilities, though not 
every position requires routine deployment to disaster sites. All positions are 
subject to recall around the clock for emergency management operations, which 
may require irregular work hours, work at locations other than the official duty 
station, and may include duties other than those specified in the employee’s 
official position description. Travel requirements in support of emergency 
operations may be extensive in nature (weeks to months), with little advance 

35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
notice, and may require employees to relocate to emergency sites with physically 
austere and operationally challenging conditions; and  

16. Other essential information, such as tour of duty, telework eligibility, hazardous 
conditions, travel required, need for a security clearance, Financial Disclosure 
Statement requirement, moving expenses being paid/not paid, and 
managerial/supervisory probationary period requirement. 

SECTION 5.  EVALUATION AND REFERRAL OF CANDIDATES 
A certificate will be issued for each grade level for which the position was advertised and 
qualified candidates exist. 

A.  Merit Promotion Certificate.  Up to 15 candidates, with a rating of 85.00 or above and 
who are solely eligible under competitive procedures, will be referred on a Merit 
Promotion certificate for any one vacant position.  Two additional candidates will be 
referred for each additional vacancy.  Candidates will be referred in alphabetical order by 
last name.  

B.  Non-Competitive Certificate.  All qualified candidates that are eligible under special 
hiring authorities (e.g., Veterans Recruitment Authority, 30 percent or more disabled 
veterans, Schedule A—appointment of individuals with disabilities, Peace Corps 
volunteers, etc.) or for non-competitive reinstatement, reassignment, or transfer will be 
separately referred on a Non-Competitive certificate.  Non-competitive eligibles will be 
referred in alphabetical order by last name. 

SECTION 6. SELECTION AND NOTIFICATION TO CANDIDATES  

A.  The Agency will notify all candidates of receipt of their application, eligibility and 

qualifications determination, certification referral, and final status of their application.  

B.  Review and Explanation  

1.  If a vacancy cannot be filled once a list of candidates has been certified for the 
vacancy, the Agency will give an employee who has made inquiry under this 
Section the reason why the position was not filled.  

2.  A vacancy announcement shall not be canceled for the purpose of avoiding 

conformance with the merit promotion plan or this Agreement.  

SECTION 7.  CAREER LADDER PROMOTION  

A.  Career Ladder promotion is the promotion of an employee without further competition 
when the competition was held at an earlier stage.  Career Ladder promotions are not 
subject to merit promotion.   

B.  When the performance plan is prepared and discussed with the employee at the beginning 
of the appraisal period, the supervisor will discuss the type of grade-building assignments 
that may be assigned to the employee during the appraisal year, as well as what the 
supervisor expects concerning the employee's performance in order to be promoted to the 
next grade level. 

SECTION 8. UNION REVIEW OF COMPETITIVE ACTIONS 

36 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A.  An employee who wishes to challenge a competitive action may seek the assistance of the 
Union in filing a grievance or requesting information on the competitive action.  The Union 
may request information regarding the competitive selection packages pursuant to Article 
4, Section 6 Information Requests.  

B.  For the purposes of this Article, competitive selection packages include the following (with 

redactions in accordance with the Privacy Act): 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 

SF-50 of Selectee (copy) 
Referral List (signed and dated by the Selecting Official citing action taken) 
Employees’ Applications 
Priority Consideration Clearance Report (if applicable) 
Job Analysis (signed and dated by Selecting Official)(weights redacted) 
Vacancy Announcement 
Position Description 
Request for Personnel Recruit Action 

SECTION 9.  CAREER PATH TOOL 
Upward mobility is geared toward helping employees find opportunities for advancement and 
make use of resources that can help them on their career path.  The Agency will create a web-
based tool to enable employees to create personalized career plans that highlight the 
competencies needed for professional growth, and identify beneficial developmental 
opportunities.  The Agency will update the Union on the development and implementation of the 
Career Path Tool.   

37 

 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 11: POSITION DESCRIPTIONS & CLASSIFICATION 

SECTION 1.  GENERAL 
The Parties agree to follow the policies and procedures set forth in FEMA Manual 252-2-1, 
Positions Management and Classification, dated June 19, 2014, except as otherwise provided in 
this Agreement.  

SECTION 2.  POSITION DESCRIPTIONS 

A.  The Agency shall provide each employee with a current position description which 

accurately reflects the duties and functions performed by the employee.   

B.  A position description does not list every duty an employee may be assigned; but reflects 

those duties which are series and grade controlling. 

C.  Employees who believe that they  are performing  major duties outside  the scope of 
their  position  description or that the position description is inaccurate shall raise the 
discrepancies with their immediate supervisor.  If the employee and supervisor cannot 
resolve the issue, the employee may file a grievance.  Upon conclusion of the grievance 
process, if the employee still believes his or her position description is inaccurate, he or 
she may submit a written request to OCCHCO  that the position  be reviewed/audited.  
Response  to request(s) to review/audit  the position  shall  be made in writing  to the 
employee, the employee’s supervisor and the organization’s administrator. 

SECTION 3.  EMPLOYEE CLASSIFICATION CONCERNS 

A.  Employees who believe their position description accurately represents the work they 
perform, but believe the title, series and/or grade is incorrect should discuss this with 
their supervisor.   

B.  After discussing the issue with their immediate supervisor, employees may submit a 

written request to OCCHCO  that the position  be reviewed/audited.   OCCHCO shall 
provide an initial disposition within 15 calendar days of receiving the requested 
information from the employee and supervisor and a status report every 30 days 
thereafter.  A response  to request(s) to review/audit  the position  shall  be made in 
writing  to the employee, the employee’s supervisor, and the organization’s 
administrator.  

SECTION 4.  NOTIFICATION TO EMPLOYEES 

A.  Where classification audits are to be performed, advance notice of three (3) working days 

shall be provided to employees who are to be interviewed.   

B.  The employee’s supervisor will provide the employee with a copy of the determination of 

finding memorandum upon request.   

C.  The employee will be counseled by the supervisor and/or OCCHCO of the impact of the 

determination of finding.   

38 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION 5.  IMPLEMENTATION 
In the event a classification audit would result in a downgrade of any Title V position, the 
provisions of 5 C.F.R. Part 536, Grade and Pay Retention, will apply.    

39 

 
 
 
ARTICLE 12: OFFICIAL RECORDS 

SECTION 1.  OFFICIAL RECORDS AND FILES 

A.  No personnel record may be collected, maintained, or retained except in accordance with 

law, government-wide regulations, Agency regulations, and this Agreement.  All 
personnel records are confidential and will only be accessed by individuals with an 
official need to know for the performance of their duties.  Official Records must be 
retained in a secure location.   

B.  An employee may request, through their servicing Human Resources Specialist, that a 

record contained in his/her eOPF be corrected or amended   in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 
§ 552a(d)(2) and (3).  Such requests must be accompanied with supporting 
documentation.   

SECTION 2.  ACCESS TO RECORDS 

A.  An employee may access his or her Official Personnel Folder (OPF) through the 

electronic OPF system (eOPF).  The eOPF system is a secure web-based application that 
is accessible from remote locations.  Employees shall have access to their eOPF from 
their workstations or any other internet connected device.  Employees, or their 
representative(s) designated in writing, may request to receive at no cost copies of 
personnel records which are not in the eOPF.   

B.  Employees will, upon request, be provided access to their own medical records 

maintained by the Agency.  Employees’ access to their own medical records maintained 
by the Agency may be refused only if, in the sole judgment of a health care professional, 
their disclosure would be harmful to the mental or physical health of the individual.  In 
such cases, the medical record(s) may be released only to an employee’s representative 
designated in writing.  There may be instances where the Agency health care official may 
encourage the release of medical information to another health care professional.  
Documents containing health information maintained in the Agency’s personnel or 
employment records are not protected by Health Insurance Portability and Accountability 
Act (HIPAA).   

C.  The employee shall have the right to prepare and enter a concise statement of 

disagreement with any document filed on the left (temporary) side of the eOPF.  When 
the document for which the employee files a statement of disagreement is removed from 
the eOPF, the statement of disagreement will also be removed.  Nothing in this section 
shall negate an employee’s right to grieve any matter. 

SECTION 3.  OUTDATED RECORDS 
All official personnel records shall be purged and information disposed of in accordance with 
appropriate records control schedules.   

SECTION 4.  SUPERVISORY NOTES 

A.  Supervisory notes and files that are kept on employees and not placed in official files are 
for the sole use of that supervisor.  They are intended only to serve as memory joggers.   

40 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B.  If supervisors make a personal decision to keep notes on employees, the notes or files: 
1.  May not be shared with anyone unless there is an official need to know for the 
performance of their duties or is being used as part of an official action; and, 
2.  Must be maintained in secure fashion in order to prevent inappropriate disclosure. 

C.  Supervisory notes may only be used to support a disciplinary or adverse action if the 

notes are made available to the employee or designated representative.   

41 

 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 13: TRAINING & CAREER DEVELOPMENT 

SECTION 1.  GENERAL PROVISIONS 

A.  The Agency and the Union agree that the training and development of employees is of 

critical importance to carrying out the mission of the Agency and in assisting the Agency 
to attract and retain a qualified and highly proficient workforce.   

B.  The Parties encourage employees to recognize and carry out their individual 

responsibilities to keep abreast of changes occurring in their fields, crafts, trades, or 
occupations and to participate in developmental activities in order to perform more 
effectively in both current and future assignments.   

C.  The Agency agrees that when new missions are assigned, new equipment is placed 

into service, or new procedures are implemented, appropriate training, as determined 
by the Agency, may be provided to affected employees. 

D.  An employee may submit a request for training to their supervisor at any time.  

SECTION 2.  FEMA TRAINING COUNCIL 

A.  The parties agree that the Union may participate with the FEMA Training Council for 
the purpose of making recommendations regarding training and career development 
programs.  The Union representative will have full participation in all aspects of the 
FEMA Training Council.   

B.  Training issues addressed by the Council may include but will not be limited to the 

following examples: 

1.  Orientation sessions for new employees;  
2.  Collective Bargaining Agreement training; 
3.  In-service or on-the-job training to improve the employees’ capability to perform 

their current jobs;  

4.  Training for career enhancement. 

SECTION 3.  INDIVIDUAL DEVELOPMENT PLANS (IDPS) 
The Agency will encourage career development by providing individual employees the 
opportunity to develop an IDP for career advancement and job related training.  The Agency will 
assist employees in preparing IDPs, including guidance on the relation of organizational needs to 
individual career goals.  Any employee who wishes to participate in job-related training may be 
required to develop an IDP.   

SECTION 4.  TRAINING COSTS 

A.  The Agency will pay all expenses, including tuition and travel, in connection with 

training required by the Agency to perform the duties of an employee’s current position 
or a position to which an employee has been assigned. 

42 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B.  Depending upon the availability of funds and training priorities, the Agency will also pay 

appropriate expenses as needed to increase an employee’s knowledge or skills in 
connection with career growth or advancement opportunities. 

C.  When resources for training are limited, approval for training funds will be based on the 

needs of the Agency and fair criteria that are equitably applied. 

SECTION 5.  REQUIRED TRAINING 
Training required by the Agency will generally be conducted during an employee’s regularly 
scheduled work hours.  Employees will be required to attend training to which she/he is 
assigned.    Failure to attend may result in disciplinary action and/or reimbursement of the 
training funds. 

SECTION 6.  TRAINING INFORMATION 
The Agency will ensure that training opportunities are appropriately communicated via posting 
to the FEMA intranet site.  Upon request, the Agency will advise individual employees of 
training opportunities that meet identified educational or career objectives. 

SECTION 7.  NOTIFICATION REGARDING TRAINING REQUESTS 
Employees will be notified of approval or disapproval of training requests as soon as possible but 
in every case prior to the starting date of the training.  Should an employee’s request for training 
be disapproved solely for lack of funds, the employee may resubmit a request for training as 
funds become available.  If not selected for training, the employee will be notified in writing of 
the reasons. 

SECTION 8.  TUITION ASSISTANCE PROGRAM 
The Agency and the Union will work together to explore the possibility of establishing a Tuition 
Assistance Program to encourage and support the continuing education and training of 
employees.  The Parties will consider budget and staffing implications, and the programs impact 
on employee recruitment, retention, and overall morale concerns.   

SECTION 9.  STUDENT LOAN REPAYMENT PROGRAM 
The Agency and the Union will work together to explore the possibility of establishing a Student 
Loan Repayment Program to help FEMA employees repay all or part of outstanding federally 
insured student loans.  The Parties will consider budget and staffing implications, and the 
programs impact on employee recruitment, retention, and overall morale concerns.   

43 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 14: PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT 

SECTION 1.  GENERAL  

A.  The Parties agree to follow the policies and procedures set forth in FEMA Manual 255-1-
1, FEMA Employee Performance Management Program (EPMP), dated February 21, 
2013, and FEMA Manual 3700.2, Employee Performance System, dated May 15, 1984, 
except as otherwise provided in this Agreement. 

B.  Information will be posted on the FEMA intranet site explaining key aspects of the 

performance management process.   

C.  A goal of the performance management program is to develop highly skilled employees 
and a professionally trained workforce, promote and sustain a high-performance culture, 
and achieve organizational and individual excellence. 

D.  The performance management program assists the Agency in: 

1.  Communicating and clarifying organizational goals; 
2.  Identifying and addressing developmental needs for individual employees; 
3.  Assessing and improving individual, team and organizational performance; 
4.  Developing measures to be used as a basis for recognizing and rewarding 

accomplishments; and 

5.  Documenting performance as a basis for appropriate personnel actions. 

SECTION 2.  PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT FOR GENERAL SCHEDULE (GS) 
AND CORE EMPLOYEES 

A.  Definitions 

1.  Critical Element – Work assignments or responsibilities of such importance that 
unacceptable performance on the element would result in a determination that an 
employee’s overall performance is unacceptable.  

2.  Minimum Period: The 90 day period of time during which an employee must 

perform under an approved performance plan before receiving a rating of record 
or an interim evaluation. 

3.  Performance – An employee’s accomplishment of assigned work or 

responsibilities.  

4.  Performance Cycle: The 12-month time period for reviewing employee 

performance (also known as an appraisal cycle or rating cycle). The performance 
cycle begins January 1 and ends December 31. 

5.  Performance Plan – A written plan that describes the performance expectations 

(i.e. performance goals, core competencies, and associated performance 
standard(s)) that are to be met during the performance cycle.   

6.  Performance Standard – The management-approved expression of the 

performance threshold(s), requirement(s), or expectation(s) that must be met to be 
appraised at a particular level of performance.  A performance standard may focus 
on, for example, factors such as quality, quantity, timeliness, and manner of 
performance.  Performance standards under the Program are described at the 
“Achieved Expectations” and “Achieved Excellence” levels. 

44 

 
 
 
 
 
 
7.  Progress Review – A documented discussion, typically conducted on a quarterly 

basis, between an employee and the employee’ rating official about the 
employee’s actual performance as compared to the performance expectations set 
forth in the employee’ performance plan.  

8.  Rating Official – The official, generally the first-level supervisor, who prepares 
the employee’s performance plan with input from the employee, conducts 
progress reviews, and prepares any interim evaluations and the final rating of 
record. 

9.  Rating of Record – A written performance appraisal that is prepared at the end of 
the performance cycle, covering an employee’s performance of assigned duties 
against performance expectations over the entire performance cycle and includes 
the assignment of a summary rating level.  

10. Summary Rating – Combining the written appraisals of each critical element (on 
which there has been an opportunity to perform for the minimum period, i.e., 90 
calendars days) in order to assign a summary rating level.  The rating official 
derives the summary rating from appraising the employee’s performance during 
the appraisal period on each element. 

B.    Planning and Communicating Performance 

1.  At the beginning of the performance cycle, a temporary promotion that is 

expected to last more than 90-days, and upon entry into a new position, a written 
performance plan shall be developed identifying the specific performance 
expectations for which the employee will be held accountable.  

2.  The rating official and the employee will discuss the Agency's desired program 
and management outcomes as well as the individual performance objectives 
toward which the employee should be focusing his/her efforts.  The employee will 
be held accountable for his/her performance during the upcoming appraisal 
period.  The discussion should also focus on the development of performance 
metrics that are quantifiable and results-based for each individual performance 
objective.   

C.  Employee Performance Plan 

1.  The EPMP endeavors to balance the demonstration of core competencies and 

achievement of individual performance goals. 

a. Core Competencies – The measurable or observable knowledge, skills, 

abilities, behaviors, and other characteristics required by a position that have 
been validated and which apply broadly to all or many jobs within the 
Department.  Each core competency is a critical element.   

b.Individual Performance Goals – Specific goals assigned to an employee by 

the supervisor that describe detailed results that are to be achieved and 
which are described in the employee’s performance plan.  A minimum of 
one goal must be assigned to an individual; however, three to five goals may 
be appropriate given the complexity and grade of the position.  Each 
individual performance goal is a critical element unless defined as a 
developmental or team goal by the rating official in the goal title.   

45 

 
 
 
2.  While rating officials should involve employees in the development of their 
performance standards to the extent practicable, rating officials retain sole 
discretion to determine the standards associated with each goal (e.g., quality, 
quantity, timeliness, manner of performance) at the “Achieved Expectations” and 
the “Achieved Excellence” levels.  Performance objectives should clearly define 
expectations and differentiate within performance levels.   

D.  Monitoring Performance 

1.  Progress Reviews.  There should be continuous feedback between the employee 

and his/her rating official.  Progress reviews may take place at any time during the 
performance cycle; however are required quarterly.  Ratings are not assigned for 
progress reviews.   

2.  Annual Rating of Record.  An annual rating of record will be completed after the 
end of the performance cycle, in accordance with FEMA Manual 255-1-1.  
Employees are encouraged to provide input about their performance and a self-
assessment prior to completion of the rating. 

3.  Dealing with Poor Performance.  At any time during the performance cycle, if a 
Rating Official determines that an employee is performing poorly in one or more 
critical elements, appropriate action will be taken to address the performance 
deficiencies as soon as possible.   

SECTION 3.  PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT FOR WAGE GRADE EMPLOYEES 

A.  Definitions 

1.  Employee Performance Plan: A set of written expectations of work 

accomplishment and skills development.  The Employee Performance Plan 
defines the performance expected of any employee in terms of performance 
criteria. 

2.  Performance Criteria: A component of the performance plan that defines 

employee performance responsibilities and expectations. 

3.  Rating of Record: The overall rating for the performance cycle.  This rating is the 
final rating for the performance cycle and represents the official evaluation of the 
employee’s performance based on the combined final ratings for each 
performance criterion. 

4.  Unacceptable: A rating where the employee has failed to perform at a proficient 

level in one or more of the critical performance criteria. 

5.  Proficient: Performance in which the employee consistently performs in an 

acceptable manner, as described in the Employee Performance Plan. 

6.  Superior: Performance in which the employee consistently demonstrates unusual 
initiative in performing job responsibilities and consistently performs in a manner 
which is significantly beyond what is expected by the supervisor.  The rating 
represents a level of performance of such unusually high quality, that it would 
normally occur only among a small percentage of employees performing under 
similar conditions.   

B.  Employee Performance Plan 

46 

 
 
 
 
1.  The standard performance plan for all employees includes 10 performance 

criteria: Job Knowledge, Completing Tasks, Quality of Work, Customer Service, 
Problem Solving, Communication, Improving Work Processes, Coordination, 
Team Work, and Professional Development.   

2.  Performance plans will be issued within 30 days of an employee’s entrance on 

duty, reassignment or detail to new duties reasonably expected to last more than 
90 days, or the beginning of a new performance cycle. 

C.  Performance Cycle.  The performance cycle is one year and coincides with the fiscal 

year.  The starting date of the performance cycle is October 1.  The performance cycle 
ends the following September 30. 

D.  Monitoring Performance. 

1.  Quarterly Performance Reviews: First-level supervisors and employees will meet 
quarterly to discuss work performance and the employee’s ability to meet his/her 
requirements.  

a. Performance relative to each criterion will be judged by the supervisor to be 

either On Target (OT) or Less Than Expected (LTE): 
i. 

“OT” indicates that performance in this criterion is at least acceptable 
and the employee’s progress over the previous quarter is on target. 
“LTE” notifies the employee that his/her performance in this area is 
less than expected by the supervisor. 

ii. 

2.  Annual Rating of Record.  Ratings of record shall be given in accordance with 

FEMA Manual 3700.2.  The final rating will be either Unacceptable, Proficient, 
or Superior.   

3.  Dealing with Poor Performance.  If attempts to remedy LTE performance in any 

one of the critical criteria have not been successful, and if performance is 
continuing in such a way as to indicate that the employee’s final rating is going to 
be Unacceptable unless it improves significantly, a Performance Improvement 
Plan shall be issued.  

SECTION 4.  PERFORMANCE IMPROVEMENT PLAN (PIP) 

A.  Before a performance based action is taken against an employee, the employee will be 
given an opportunity to demonstrate acceptable performance through the issuance of a 
written PIP. (5 USC 4302(B)(1)).   

B.  The PIP will include the following: 

1.  Identify Problems.  Identification and articulation of each critical element being 

performed at an unacceptable level. 

2.  Explain Standards.  An explanation of what the employee must do to bring his or 
her performance in the critical elements so identified up to an acceptable level. 

3.  Allow Improvement.  A reasonable period of time commensurate with the 

employee’s duties and responsibilities in which to improve performance, but not 
less than sixty (60) days. 

4.  Provide Assistance.  Where appropriate, the types of assistance that will be 

provided to the employee in improving his or her performance. 

47 

 
 
 
 
 
C.  MONITORING AND FEEDBACK:  The supervisor will monitor the PIP and provide 

feedback to the employee. 

D.  Upon request, the employee will be given a reasonable amount of time to meet with a 

union representative to discuss the PIP. 

E.  RIGHT TO REVIEW DOCUMENTS:  When a PIP is issued, the employee or his or her 
representative will be provided, upon written request, with a copy of the documents on 
which the PIP is based.  The Agency will also supply the employee or his or her 
representative, upon written request, with a copy of any documents demonstrating 
instances of acceptable performance on the critical element(s) at issue in the PIP. 

SECTION 5.  RECORDKEEPING  
The retention, maintenance, accessibility, and disposal of performance records, as well as rating 
officials’ copies, will be in accordance with Office of Personnel Management regulations.  

48 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 15: AWARDS AND RECOGNITION 

SECTION 1.  GENERAL 

A.  The Parties agree to follow the policies, procedures, and authorities set forth in FEMA 

Manual 255-4-1, Employee Awards and Recognition, dated September 26, 2013, except 
as otherwise provided in this Agreement.   

B.  FEMA is committed to maintaining a highly skilled workforce to achieve the 

organizational excellence necessary to guarantee quality service to the public.  The 
Awards Program is designed to create an environment where employees actively and 
continually seek better ways to do their jobs and improve organizational performance, 
and take great pride in their achievements.  The Awards Program recognizes employees 
based on the merits of their accomplishment, contributions and innovations in support of 
the Agency's vision, mission, core values, and strategic goals.  

SECTION 2.  FUNDING 
The employer retains the right to determine how much of its budget will be allocated for 
monetary recognition for bargaining unit employees. 

SECTION 3.  AWARD CATEGORIES 

A.  Administrator’s Awards: The Administrator’s Awards are honorary awards given by the 
Administrator to individuals and groups that have clearly demonstrated extraordinary 
performance in support of the Agency's Strategic Plan.  

B.  Length of Service Awards: Length of Service is an honorary award recognizing years of 

service in the Federal Government, including active duty military service.  

C.  Recognition Items: Recognition items are honorary awards such as a letter, certificate, 

pin, plaque with citation, or other recognition items of nominal value including gift cards 
or gift certificates.  

D.  On-the-Spot Awards: On-the-Spot (OTS) awards provide recognition for a specific act or   

service that is in the public interest and has exceeded normal job requirements.  

E.  Performance-Based Awards: Performance-based awards are lump sum cash awards or 

time-off awards designed to recognize employees for the accomplishment of duties based 
on merit at the end of the performance cycle.  

F.  Quality Step Increases: A Quality Step Increase (QSI) provides an incentive to the 

employee and recognizes unusually high quality performance by granting an earlier than 
normal step increase.  

G.  Special Act Awards: Special Act Awards are one-time, lump sum cash awards granted in 
recognition of a meritorious personal effort, act, service, scientific, or other achievement 
accomplished within or outside assigned job responsibilities related to official 
employment with FEMA.  

49 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
H.  Time-Off Awards: A Time-Off Award (TOA) is an excused absence granted to an 

employee to be used without charge to leave or loss of pay in recognition of individual or 
group contributions or accomplishments.  

SECTION 4.  NOMINATIONS 
Employees may nominate other employees for awards by submitting nomination forms to the 
employee’s supervisor.   

SECTION 5.  ANNUAL DATA 
In order to generate understanding, openness, and confidence, the Union will be provided annual 
statistical data consisting of the dollar amount budgeted per Program Office and a listing of 
employees who received an award including title, series, and grade.  A meeting may be requested 
by the Union to discuss any concerns or issues it may have regarding the data.  

50 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 16: UNIFORMS 

SECTION 1.  GENERAL 

A.  The Parties agree to follow the policies and procedures set forth in FEMA Directive 123-
18-REV, Standard FEMA-Distinctive Clothing, dated July 25, 2011, except as otherwise 
provided in this Agreement. 

B.  This article applies to bargaining unit employees who are required to wear specific 

clothing items to perform their duties.   

C.  Uniform refers to a specified article or articles of clothing that may include, but is not 
limited to, such items as shoes, boots, hats, shirts, slacks, skirts, or outerwear an 
employee is required by an agency to wear to provide a distinctive and easily identifiable 
appearance in performing his or her job.  A “uniform” does not include protective 
equipment required for the employee's safety under 5 USC 7903 or normal business or 
work attire purchased at the discretion of the employee. 

D.  If the uniform logos, patches, and or designs are changed or altered, employees will have 
six months from the date of implementation to be in full compliance.   Employees not in 
proper uniform may be prohibited from performing daily work.  Employees will not be 
prohibited from performing daily work and will not be denied available overtime 
opportunities if the Agency does not provide uniform items or equipment in a timely 
manner, provided the employee did not substantively contribute to the delay. 

E.  Employees are responsible for adhering to uniform requirements and guidelines outlined 
in this Article.  Failure to adhere to uniform requirements may result in disciplinary 
action. 

SECTION 2.  INITIAL UNIFORM ISSUE 

A.  When a new employee is hired and brought on board, FEMA will provide the employee 

with an initial uniform allotment consisting of all required uniform items and accessories.   

B.  If a current employee is promoted, he or she will get issued an initial uniform upgrade of 

items that have changed. 

SECTION 3.  UNIFORM REPLACEMENT 

A.  The Agency will replace uniform items as needed due to job-related damage or wear.   

B.  Employees requesting a replacement must submit their replacement requirement to their 
supervisor so the uniform item can be ordered, if needed.  Once the replacement item is 
received or available, the employee will be notified.  After notification, the damaged or 
worn items must be turned in to their supervisor or designated point of contact and the 
employee will receive the new uniform item.   

SECTION 4.  MATERNITY UNIFORMS 
Upon notification to the Agency by the employee of the pregnancy, maternity uniforms will be 

51 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
issued to the employee as needed as long as the employee performs work assignments normally 
assigned to uniformed employees. 

SECTION 5.  PROFESSIONAL APPEARANCE OF UNIFORM 

A.  When wearing the uniform, employees will, at all times, present a neat  appearance—

clothes cleaned, pressed, and in an acceptable state of repair.   

B.  The wearing of jewelry or other accessories may not interfere with the ability to  wear 

personal protective equipment. 

C.  Unit employees may elect to wear pins with AFGE Union insignia on their uniform while 

on duty.  Any AFGE Union pin must be reviewed and approved by the Agency in 
advance.  

SECTION 6.  PROPER USE OF UNIFORMS 

A.  Employees may wear their FEMA uniform during the normal work commute, on breaks, 
during meal periods, or during time periods between split shifts.  Employees may also 
wear their uniform during brief stops that are part of the normal work commute.  
Examples of stops that may be part of the normal work commute include, but are not 
limited to, dropping off and picking up children from day care or school, and briefly 
stopping to buy a cup of coffee. 

B.  The public will view an employee in uniform as representing FEMA, even if the 

employee is off duty.  Therefore, any wearing of a FEMA distinctive uniform off-duty, 
except as provided in Section 6.A, is prohibited.  In particular, employees may not wear a 
FEMA distinctive uniform in inappropriate establishments, or participate in activities that 
could compromise the credibility of FEMA.  Examples of activities not permitted while 
in uniform include, but are not limited to, gambling, consuming alcoholic beverages, or 
participating in public events (including volunteer activities) not explicitly approved or 
sponsored by FEMA/DHS.  If employees have questions about a specific activity, they 
should discuss it with their supervisors. 

C.  Employees may wear their uniforms at solemn occasions, such as funerals or memorials, 

with Agency approval. 

SECTION 7. CHANGES 
In the event the Agency exercises its right to change, modify, amend or alter its uniform program 
in a manner that affects bargaining unit employees, the Agency will follow the procedures in 
Article 9, Impact Bargaining and Midterm Bargaining.   

52 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 17: WORK SCHEDULES 

SECTION 1.  GENERAL 

A.  Scheduling of Work Policy.  The Parties agree to follow the policies, procedures, and 
authorities set forth in FEMA Manual 106-1-1, Scheduling of Work, dated March 5, 
2014, except as otherwise provided in this Agreement.  

B.  Premium Pay Policy.  The Parties agree to follow the policies, procedures, and authorities 
set forth in FEMA Manual 253-2-1, Premium Pay, dated February 11, 2014 except as 
otherwise provided in this Agreement.     

SECTION 2.  WORK SCHEDULES 

A.  Traditional Work Schedule.  Unless an employee has requested and been approved for 

alternate work schedule, the employee will work a traditional work schedule.   

1.  TWS workdays consist of:  

a.  For full-time employees, eight hours per day, 40 hours per week; and  
b.  For part-time employees, between 16 and 32 hours per week and, eight or 

fewer hours per day on five or fewer days per week.  

B.  Alternative Work Schedule.  All employees will be afforded the opportunity to 

participate in an alternative work schedule unless prohibited by the specific nature of 
their position. 

1.  Flexible Work Schedule: A work schedule established with approval by the 

employee’s supervisor that:  

a.  In the case of a full-time employee, has an 80-hour biweekly basic work 

requirement that allows an employee to determine his or her own schedule 
within the limits set by FEMA’s business and core hours.  
b.  In the case of a part-time employee, has a biweekly basic work 

requirement of 64 hours or less that allows an employee to determine his 
or her own schedule within the limits set by FEMA’s business and core 
hours. 

2.  Compressed Work Schedule: A work schedule established with approval by the 

employee’s supervisor that:  

a.  For a full-time employee, has an 80-hour biweekly basic work 

requirement scheduled for fewer than 10 workdays. 

b.  For a part-time employee, has a biweekly basic work requirement of 64 

hours or less scheduled for fewer than 10 workdays.  

3.    Requesting an AWS 

a.  Employees may request to participate in an AWS by preparing a FEMA 
Form 106-0-1-1 and forwarding it to their supervisor for approval. 

b.  Supervisors must approve or deny an employee’s request prior to the pay 

period in which the schedule would take effect.  A supervisor must state the 
reasons for denying an employee’s request on FEMA Form 106-0-1-1.  

4.    All types of Alternative Work Schedules may be combined with telework. 

C.  Court/Administrative Hearing Appearances.  An employee called to testify in an official 

53 

 
 
 
 
 
 
capacity is in official duty status and his/her appearance is considered hours of work.  An 
employee’s work schedule may be adjusted to facilitate the employee’s appearance in an 
official capacity during duty hours.  An employee required to extend his/her duty day or 
appear on a non-duty day will be compensated in accordance with applicable law and 
regulation. 

D.  Fire Department Work Schedule.  Full-time crew chiefs, firefighters and paramedics will 
work a rotating schedule consisting of 6, 24-hour shifts equaling 144 hours within a pay 
period.  Fire inspectors will work shifts equaling either 112 or 120 hours within a pay 
period.  When considering a change to the firefighter schedule, the Agency will engage in 
pre-decisional discussions with the Union.   

E.  Compensatory Time Off for Religious Observances.  An employee whose personal 

religious beliefs require absence from work during certain periods of time may elect to 
work overtime, with supervisory approval, to offset the time absent in meeting that 
religious obligation. 

1.  An employee who is approved for such overtime work will be granted equal 

compensatory time off in lieu of overtime pay.   

2.  The overtime work must be performed within 3 weeks preceding or following the 

period of religious observance. 

3.   If the employee does not perform the overtime work within this timeframe, the 

hours will be charged to annual leave or LWOP. 

F.  Lunch or Meal Period.  Work schedules of employees (except firefighters and police 
officers) required to work more than five hours per workday will include a 30-minute 
unpaid lunch or meal period, unless modified to meet operational needs.  This unpaid 
lunch or meal break period may be extended to a maximum of one hour provided the 
workday is correspondingly extended.  Lunch or meal periods may not be scheduled at 
the beginning or end of the workday.  Because employees receive no compensation for 
lunch or meal periods, they must be entirely free of the duties of their positions during 
this period.  An employee may not work through the lunch or meal period in order to 
extend paid time or to otherwise modify his or her established schedule.  

G.  Break Periods.  Workload permitting, an employee will be given a 15 minute break which 
normally would occur in the middle of each four (4) hour work period.  This break may 
not be combined with the lunch or meal period.  Additional break time may be provided 
at the discretion of supervisors in extenuating personal circumstances and workload 
permitting.  If additional break time is granted, the employee’s daily schedule will be 
extended by the additional period of time the employee is given.  

SECTION 3. OVERTIME 

A.  Overtime Work.  The parties recognize the right of management to direct and approve 

overtime as afforded in 5 USC 7106 (a)(2)(a) and (b).   

B.  Compensation.  All overtime work will be compensated in accordance with applicable 

law and regulation. 

54 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
C.  Assignment of Overtime Work.  Overtime work will be assigned in an equitable manner 
among qualified employees.  When management decides to use overtime, qualified 
volunteers will be used before non-volunteers.  Agency shall determine the numbers, job 
categories, skills, and experience required to meet its  overtime assignments and the 
employees who meet these requirements.  Overtime shall not be distributed or withheld as 
a reward or punishment. 

D.  Scheduled Overtime.  

1.  Some work units have work schedules that include scheduled overtime in the 
work schedule (e.g. pre-shift or post-shift activities, 24/7 coverage requiring a 
shift change briefing). 

2.  Canine Handlers are required to be responsible for the care, control, grooming, 
training, and exercise of the assigned police dog 24 hours per day, including the 
officer’s non-duty days.  Canine Handlers are authorized one hour of overtime per 
day for this at-home care, as well as the maintenance of the assigned K-9 vehicle.  
If the care for the canine (or an additional canine) and/or K-9 vehicle will require 
more than the one hour authorized,  the Canine Handler shall notify his/her 
supervisor and seek advanced approval to work additional time.  On days the 
Canine Handler is not in possession of an assigned police dog or is not able to 
perform the at-home care duties, the Canine Handler is not entitled to scheduled 
overtime.   

E.  Hardships.  Upon request and a reasonable showing that a requirement to work overtime 
shall be a hardship on the employee, management may excuse employees from overtime, 
provided that management can meet requirements by utilizing the services of other 
employees. 

F.  Call-Back Overtime 

1.  Call-back overtime work is irregular or occasional overtime work performed by 
an employee called back to work from an off-duty status or called back to work 
on a day on which no work was scheduled.  Call back of employees shall be made 
at the discretion of the Agency when  employees are needed to help mitigate or 
control an incident. 

2.  Procedures 

a.  In situation where there is less than 12 hours available to identify an 

employee to perform overtime due to an absence or other short notice 
reason, management may assign an employee to cover the shift.  
Supervisors shall attempt to distribute overtime work in such instances 
equitably among qualified employees.   

b.  In situations where there is more than 12 hours to identify an employee to 
perform overtime, call-back procedures will be used to meet staffing 
requirements. 

i. 

For work units that currently have call-back procedures, they may 
continue to use the call-back procedures as long as they meet the 
requirements below.   

55 

 
 
 
 
 
ii. 

For work units that do not have a call-back procedure, any newly 
established call-back procedure must: 
a)  Allow for the identification and utilization of volunteers and a 
way for employees to temporarily indicate their unavailability 
(volunteer list), 

b)  Utilize a fair method of contacting volunteers, based on 
seniority or some other agreed upon objective standard, 

c)  Utilize a single mandatory overtime list, created as appropriate 
within each work unit or job function, based on seniority or 
some other agreed upon objective standard, 

d)  Take into consideration the skillset required for the overtime 
work, approved leave, and safety considerations (number of 
hours consecutively worked).  

3.  Employees are not authorized to report for duty unless requested by the Agency.   
4.  An employee who is called back to work, at a time outside of and unconnected 
with the employee’s scheduled hours of work, will receive a minimum of two 
hours call-back pay.  Employees are not generally compensated for their commute 
time, except when a Canine Officer is called out or dispatched after duty hours to 
respond to an emergency situation in support of federal, state, or local agency for 
explosive detection canine duties.  For these instances, a Canine Officer’s call-
back time commences when the Canine Officer signs into service and concludes 
when the canine is secured at the officer’s residence.  

H.  Standby Time 

1.  Time spent on standby duty is hours of work if, for work-related reasons, the 
employee is restricted by official order to a designated post of duty and is 
assigned to be in a state of readiness to perform work with limitations on the 
employee’s activities so substantial that the employee cannot use the time 
effectively for his or her own purposes. 

2.  Procedures: The employee must be officially notified by his or her supervisor in 
order to be on standby duty.  The notice must include the post of duty to which 
the employee is restricted and the date and beginning and ending times for the 
period of standby duty. 

I.  On-Call Time.   

1.  Both FLSA exempt and nonexempt employees are considered off duty and time spent 
in an on-call status is not considered hours of work if:  

a.  The employee is allowed  to leave a telephone number or carry an electronic 
device upon which he or she may be contacted, even though the employee is 
required to remain within a reasonable call-back radius; or  

b.  The employee is allowed to make arrangements for another employee to perform 

any work that arises.  

2. Procedures: 

a.  The employee must be officially notified by his or her supervisor in order 
to be on call.  The notice must include the date and beginning and ending 
times for the period of on call status. 

56 

 
 
 
b.  During the on call period an employee must remain available by phone at 

all times and report to work within two hours after being called. 

c.  Employees failing to report to work within two hours after being called 
without a legitimate, justifiable excuse may be subject to disciplinary 
action. 

SECTION 6. SHIFT WORK 
The following provisions apply to employees who are regularly scheduled for shift assignments.  
Shifts assignments may be used in work units requiring coverage 24 hours a day, seven (7) days 
a week or requiring regular coverage outside normal work hours. 

A.  Requesting Temporary Shift Changes 

1.  Employees may request to trade a shift with another employee when: 

a.  The trade is between employees who are in a similar position, similarly 

graded, and are qualified to perform the same duties 
b.  The trade does not create an entitlement to premium pay 
c.  The trade is for at least one full shift  
d.  The shift or shifts being traded do not extend beyond one pay period 

2.  The requests for temporary shift changes must be made in writing and submitted 

to the employee’s immediate supervisor seven days in advance.     

3.  Shift trades must be approved at the supervisory level which has authority over 
the employees involved.  Shift change requests will be approved at least three 
days in advance. 

B.  Requesting Permanent Shift Changes 

1.  The requests for permanent shift changes must be made in writing and submitted 

to the employee’s immediate supervisor 30 days in advance.    

2.  If there are multiple individuals requesting to be transferred to the same shift, 
assignment will be made on the basis of seniority, except when there are 
reasonable accommodation needs.   

3.  Permanent shift change requests are approved at the discretion of the supervisor.  

When approved, approval will be at least seven days in advance. 

4.  An employee’s voluntary request to change shifts may cause his/her previously 

approved leave to be cancelled.   

C.  Involuntary Shift Change 

1.  Employees may be involuntarily transferred to another shift to address personnel 
shortages.  However, the Agency will first seek volunteers to change to another 
shift by announcing the shift change opportunity and identifying the job 
categories, skills, or experience required. 

2.  If there are not enough volunteers, the Agency will identify the employees with 
the job categories, skills, or experience required.  Selections from among these 
qualified employees will be done on the basis of inverse seniority.   

3.  The Agency will notify affected employees and the Union at least 15 days in 

advance of a change.   

4.  Once the personnel shortage has been resolved, the employee may request to 

return to the shift from which they were transferred.  Management will make a 

57 

 
 
 
 
reasonable effort to accommodate the request.   

58 

 
 
 
ARTICLE 18: ABSENCE AND LEAVE 

SECTION 1.  GENERAL 

A.  The parties agree to follow the policies and procedures set forth in FEMA Manual 123-

10-1, Absence and Leave, dated December 29, 2015, except as otherwise provided in this 
Agreement. 

B.  Accrual and Use of Leave. Employees earn annual and sick leave in accordance with 
their tenure and type of appointment in the federal service and applicable leave 
regulations. The minimum charge for leave will be one-quarter hour. 

SECTION 2.  SCHEDULING OF WORK AND LEAVE 

A.  Reporting for Duty Mission Ready.  Employees must report to work mission ready. 

Employees who are issued FEMA equipment that is necessary to perform their duties, 
must report to their designated worksite with such equipment according to their 
authorized duty schedule. If an employee must leave his/her duty station to retrieve any 
necessary equipment, the employee shall use accrued annual leave, credit hours, or 
compensatory time to retrieve the equipment. In lieu of using paid leave, supervisors may 
approve LWOP if the employee does not have accrued leave. In all cases, employees 
shall not be granted administrative leave with pay to retrieve missing equipment. 

B.  Requests for Leave or Approved Absence.  An employee who wishes to take leave must 

submit his/her leave request using WebTA or successor system. The request must include 
the day(s), the type of leave, the number of hours, and the specific hours (from-to) of the 
absence being requested by the employee.  Employees should provide their supervisors 
with as much advanced notice as possible for leave requests.  When the need for leave 
arises in unforeseeable circumstances that prevent the employee from reporting to duty 
on a timely basis, the employee will contact the immediate supervisor or designated 
Agency official(s) to provide notice and request leave before the beginning of his or her 
reporting time or as soon as possible thereafter. 

C.  Timely Responses to Requests.  Consistent with the needs of the Agency and the 
Employee, leave requests will be decided in a timely manner.  If requested by the 
employee in writing, a written explanation for a denial will be provided to the employee 
within 10 working days of the request for explanation. 

D.  Cancellation of Leave.  An employee may cancel previously approved leave.  The 

Agency must be informed of this decision in a timely manner, e.g., as far in advance of 
returning to work as possible.  

SECTION 3. ANNUAL LEAVE 

A.  An employee may use annual leave for vacation, rest, relaxation, personal business or 
emergencies. An employee has a right to take annual leave, subject to the right of the 
supervisor to schedule time at which time annual leave can be taken. 

59 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B.  Approval.  When multiple requests for annual leave for the same period cannot be 

granted, the supervisor will attempt to resolve the conflict between the employees.  A 
supervisor may consider any of the following factors when weighing competing leave 
requests:  

1.  Accrued Leave.  The employee’s accrued leave balance (e.g., the request of an 
employee who has “use or lose” leave could be given preference over one who 
has a lower leave balance).  

2.  Previous Request.  Whether the requesting employee was denied leave at the 

desired time during a previous leave year.  

3.  Seniority.  The requesting employee’s seniority, with the same meaning and usage 

as elsewhere in this Agreement.   

C.  Mount Weather Fire Department Procedure for Scheduling Annual Leave.  Procedures 

for scheduling annual leave for vacation periods are as follows: 

1.  On December 1st, the most senior individual based on comp service date, will be 
presented the  Fire Department Leave Book and the Personnel  Rotation List. 
2.  The individual will place their initials in the dates of up to 14 consecutive  days 

they are requesting for a vacation period.   Only one vacation  period per 
individual will be scheduled per rotation. 

3.  The employee will be given up to twenty four (24) hours to schedule  their 

vacation period for each rotation. 

4.  Employees on extended leave or regular break will be notified by  phone and will 
have twenty four (24) hours to schedule their vacation  period or forfeit that 
rotation.  In the interest of time, personnel can  leave a sealed proxy list of 
requested vacation times with the Assistant Chiefs who can act on their behalf. 
5.  A wish list will be attached to the Fire Department Work Schedule  Calendar for 
individuals to submit for vacations times that are already  taken when the rotation 
comes to them.  After the submittal period the  Wish List will be maintained with 
the Fire Department Leave Book. 

6.  After initialing a Vacation Period, the Fire Department Leave Book and  the 

Personnel List will be forwarded to the next person on the list.    A  rotation will 
continue until the list reaches the least senior person on  the list. 

7.  This procedure will continue to rotate for employees to schedule six (6) vacation 

periods.  

8.  Notification of the scheduled vacation periods will be  approved / disapproved and 
posted in the Fire Department Leave  Book by February 5th.  Vacation leave will 
be marked in the  book in RED ink. 

9.  Cancellation 

a.  An employee may cancel scheduled vacation at any time  before the 
start of the vacation period.  In doing so the  employee will lose the 
right to reschedule an additional  vacation period, except on a first 
come, first serve basis.   This  vacation period will be filled off the Wish 
List, if no  one has submitted this timeframe on the Wish List, this 
period  is open on a first come, first serve basis. 

b.  An employee may not cancel the middle of a vacation period.  

Vacation periods are to be consecutive days / shifts selected  during the 

60 

 
 
vacation open period.  Cancellation of any shifts  shall cause a forfeit 
either the beginning or the end of the vacation period. 

10. Annual Leave requests may be submitted any time after the posting of  the 

Vacation Schedule for the remainder of the year.    This will  be done on a first 
come, first serve basis.   This leave will be  marked in the Fire Department Leave 
Book in BLUE ink. 

SECTION 4. SICK LEAVE 

A.  Sick leave should be granted to an employee when an employee: 
1.  Schedules medical, dental, or optical examinations; 
2.  Is receiving medical, dental, or optical treatment; 
3.  Is incapacitated from the performance of position duties by physical or mental 

illness, injury, pregnancy, or childbirth; 

4.  Would, because of communicable disease, jeopardize the health of other 
employees and/or the general public by being on the job (when there is 
uncertainty as to whether a particular ailment meets the definition of a 
"communicable disease" and it is not addressed by local health regulations, the 
employee should be asked to provide a statement from the patient's physician that 
the ailment is contagious.  This statement should contain the period of time for 
which the patient must be confined or isolated); or 

5.  Must be absent from work for adoption-related activities (e.g., appointments with 
adoption agencies, social workers and attorneys, court proceedings, required 
travel, periods of time adoptive parents are required by court or agency to care for 
the adopted child). 

6.  In addition, employees may take sick leave to (1) provide care for a family 

member as a result of physical or mental illness, injury, or medical, dental, or 
optical examination or treatment; or (2) make arrangements necessitated by the 
death of a family member or attend the funeral of a family member.  

B.  Medical Certificates.  Employees are required to provide “administratively acceptable” 

evidence to their supervisor when requesting sick leave.  Normally, the only thing needed 
to satisfy this requirement is an employee’s certification on WebTA as to the reason for 
the absence.  However, for an absence in excess of three workdays (or for shorter 
absences where there are reasonable questions about the circumstances of the leave or 
where it is unclear whether the employee is totally incapacitated for duty), supervisors 
may require an employee who misses work to submit a doctor’s certification of the 
medical reason for the leave or other satisfactory evidence as to the reason for the 
absence.  If a supervisor has a reasonable basis to suspect an employee is abusing sick 
leave, the employee may be required to support all incidences of sick leave with a 
medical certificate regardless of duration.  The employee must provide the required 
certification within a reasonable amount of time.  Unapproved sick leave may be charged 
to annual leave or as AWOL. 

C.  Advancing Sick Leave. 

1.  An employee may, at the supervisor’s discretion, be granted sick leave in advance 
of accrual in the event of serious disability or ailment, defined as one which 

61 

 
 
 
 
usually lasts for at least 3 consecutive work days and is supported by a medical 
certificate. 

2.  A supervisor should not advance sick leave to an employee when it is known (or 
reasonably expected) that the employee will not return to duty (e.g., when the 
employee has applied for disability retirement). 

3.  Maximum Advance.  The amount advanced to a full-time employee may not 

exceed 240 hours.  Part-time employees, working under a regular tour of duty, 
may be advanced sick leave on a pro rata basis. 

SECTION 5. LEAVE ABUSE 
If reasonable grounds exist for questioning an employee’s use of leave, the Agency may place an 
employee on a Leave Restriction.  A Leave Restriction requires the employee to seek approval 
for any Annual Leave in advance or speak directly to the employee’s supervisor and provide 
proof of an emergency preventing the employee from reporting to work.  A Leave Restriction 
requires the employee to provide acceptable medical documentation for any Sick Leave request.  
The Leave Restriction will describe the circumstances which led to its issuance and will specify 
the termination date of the restriction.  At the end of the stated period (not to exceed six (6) 
months), the Agency will review the employee's situation and if the circumstances that led to the 
leave restriction have improved, will notify the employee in writing if the leave restriction is no 
longer in effect.  If the employee situation has not improved the Agency will notify the employee 
in writing if the Leave Restriction will be extended, and reviewed within six (6) months. 

SECTION 6. FAMILY MEDICAL LEAVE ACT 

A.  An employee is entitled to a total of 12 administrative workweeks of unpaid leave during 

any 12 month period for one of the following purposes: 

1.  The birth of a son or daughter of the employee and the care of such son or 

daughter; 

2.  The placement of a son or daughter with the employee for adoption or foster care; 
3.  The care of a spouse, son, daughter, or parent of the employee with a serious 

health condition; 

4.  In response to a serious health condition of the employee who is unable to 

perform any one or more of the essential functions of his or her position; or 
5.  Any qualifying exigency arising out of the fact that the employee’s spouse, son, 
daughter, or parent is a covered military member on covered active duty (or has 
received notice to be called to active duty) in the Armed Forces (see 5 C.F.R. § 
630.1204 for more information). 

B.  An employee (or an employee’s representative) must invoke his or her right to take leave 
under FMLA before taking leave.  An employee cannot retroactively invoke his or her 
right to take leave under FMLA, unless the employee is mentally or physically incapable 
of providing notice of his or her intent to take FMLA leave during the entire time the 
employee is absent from duty.  In such cases, the employee may be required to provide 
documentation explaining the employee’s and/or representative’s inability to notify 
FEMA of the employee’s absence.  A supervisor may ask an employee if it is his or her 
intent to invoke his or her FMLA protection when he or she is requesting qualifying 
leave. 

62 

 
 
 
 
 
SECTION 7. COURT LEAVE 

A.  Court leave is not charged to leave and will not result in a loss of pay to employees who 

serve as a juror or witness in accordance with FEMA Manual 123-10-1. 

B.  If the employee is a party to a suit with only private parties, the employee cannot use 
court leave, but must use annual leave, credit or compensatory leave, or LWOP. 

C.  Court leave must be requested in advance, and a copy of the summons or subpoena must 
be included in the request.  Employees may be required to provide proof of attendance as 
a juror or witness. 

D.  There is no limit on the amount of court leave that may be granted to an employee. 

SECTION 8. MILITARY LEAVE 

A.  Military leave will be administered in compliance with applicable laws and regulations. 

B.  Eligibility. 

1.  Full-time permanent employees or non-permanent employees with appointments 

of one year or more are eligible for military leave. 

2.  Part-time employees with a scheduled tour of duty between 16 and 32 hours per 

week are eligible for prorated military leave. 

SECTION 9. EXCUSED ABSENCE  
Employees may be excused from performing their regular duties for certain activities which are 
considered to be in the interest of the Government. Absences may also be granted in certain other 
special circumstances, such as hazardous weather conditions (subject to Article 19, Telework), 
voting, job-related medical examinations, and blood donations (up to 4 hours in accordance with 
FEMA Manual 123-10-1, Section 10-15). 

SECTION 10. LEAVE WITHOUT PAY 

A.  Leave without pay (LWOP) is a temporary non-pay status and absence from duty that 

may be granted at the employee’s request.  In most instances, granting LWOP is a matter 
of supervisory discretion and granting LWOP should be done sparingly. 

B.  Employees are entitled to LWOP under the following circumstances: 

1.  The Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (FMLA), provides covered 

employees with an entitlement to a total of up to 12 weeks of unpaid leave 
(LWOP) during any 12-month period for certain family and medical needs (see 
Chapters XX and XX and 5 C.F.R. Part 630, Subpart L). 

2.  The Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act of 1994, 

provides employees with an entitlement to LWOP when employment with FEMA 
is interrupted by a period of service in the uniformed service (see 5 C.F.R. § 
353.106). 

3.  Executive Order 5396, dated July 17, 1930, provides that disabled veterans are 

entitled to LWOP for necessary medical treatment. 

63 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.  Employees receiving workers’ compensation payments from the Department of 

Labor must be placed in an LWOP status. 

C.  LWOP must be requested and approved in advance before taking LWOP.  Failure to do 

so will result in an unauthorized absence. 

SECTION 11. VOLUNTARY LEAVE TRANSFER PROGRAM 

A.   

B. 

C. 

D. 

The Voluntary Leave Transfer Program (VLTP) allows eligible employees to donate 
annual leave or receive donated annual leave from other Federal employees in 
response to a medical emergency. 

A medical emergency is defined as a medical condition of an employee or a family 
member of an employee that may require an employee’s absence from duty for a 
prolonged period and result in a substantial loss of income to the employee because 
of the unavailability of paid leave.  You must have exhausted all of your annual (AL) 
and sick leave (SL) prior to using any donated leave. 

The Agency will post the Voluntary Leave Transfer Program (VLTP) application and 
donating procedures for the VLTP on the Intranet. 

On a quarterly basis, the Agency will provide information to all employees on the 
VLTP and a link to the list of names of employees approved for the VLTP.  

SECTION 11. BRIEF ABSENCES OR TARDINESS 
In cases of occasional brief periods of absence or tardiness of less than one (1) hour due to 
circumstances beyond his or her control; e.g., inclement weather, traffic, transportation issues, 
etc., an employee may request leave, the supervisor may grant an excused absence, or the 
employee and supervisor can agree to adjust the work schedule for that shift. 

64 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 19: TELEWORK 

SECTION 1.  GENERAL 

A.  The Parties agree to follow the policies and procedures set forth in FEMA Manual 123-9-
1, Telework, dated January 9, 2013, except as otherwise provided in this Agreement.  

B.  The purpose of telework is to complete the duties, responsibilities and other authorized 
activities (such as online training) of an employee’s official position from an alternative 
worksite, other than at the location an employee normally works.  FEMA promotes 
telework (also known as flexiplace, telecommuting, or work-from-home) as a workplace 
flexibility for recruiting top talent; retaining current employees; accommodating 
employees with disabilities; reducing the cost of office space, absenteeism, and use of 
workers compensation; and to ensure continuity of essential governmental functions in 
the event of an emergency. 

SECTION 2.  DEFINITIONS 

A.  Emergency: Includes national and local security situations, extended emergencies, or 
other unique situations when the Agency is closed or access to an employee’s official 
duty station or other agency facilities is limited.  

B.  Regular Telework (Core): Work that is performed on an established work schedule at an 
approved AWL on a regular, recurring, and ongoing basis.  Telework arrangements may 
be determined by the Supervisor to be full-time or part-time based on eligible telework 
duties and portable work needs (full-time arrangements must consider Section 3-3, 
Official Duty Station).  Employees with Regular Telework agreements may also apply 
for Situational Telework in order to work on specific projects and/or in response to an 
emergency.  

C.  Situational Telework (Episodic): Telework that occurs on an occasional, non-routine 
basis and/or during COOP/pandemic health crisis or other emergency situations. 
Supervisors have discretion to establish timeframes for Situational Telework (Episodic) 
based on work-related factors such as work priority, deadlines, etc.  When making an 
approval for a situational telework agreement for a medical reason, special project, or 
accommodation request, the agreement must be reviewed and reapproved every 30 days. 
Telework arrangements may be determined by the Supervisor to be full-time or part-time 
based on eligible telework duties and portable work needs (full-time arrangements must 
consider Section 3-3, Official Duty Station).  The definition of situational telework 
includes “unscheduled telework” as defined separately.  Situational telework may be 
used:  

1.  To allow an employee to perform work on a specific organizational project or a 

discrete portion of a project;  

2.  To permit an employee to perform work at an AWL during inclement weather;  
3.  To allow an employee to perform work when his/her official worksite is not 

accessible (e.g., building damage/emergency, or because of traffic disruption due 
to street closures, conventions, demonstrations, etc.);  

65 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.  To enable an employee to perform work at an AWL during an agency closure or 
early dismissal (see Section 3-9, Emergency Situations for further detail); or  
5.  For an employee who is recovering from illness or an injury and is temporarily 

unable to physically report to the traditional office, as supported by 
documentation from the employee’s physician.  

D.  Telework: A flexible work arrangement under which employees perform the duties and 

responsibilities of their positions from an approved worksite other than the location from 
which the employee would otherwise work.  

E.  Telework Application and Agreement: A written agreement of the terms and conditions 
of the telework arrangement that is completed and signed by the participating employee 
and the supervisor or designee(s).  

F.  Unscheduled Telework: A term applied in the context of OPM’s Washington, DC, Area 
Dismissal and Closure Procedures, in reference to telework that occurs on day(s) that a 
telework approved employee was not scheduled in advance to telework.  This is 
considered a type of situational telework and applies to all FEMA locations.  

SECTION 3. PROCEDURES 

A.  Employees requesting to telework shall: 

1.  Complete the telework awareness training 
2.  Prepare a telework documentation package (FEMA Telework Program 

Application and Agreement Form and FEMA Telework Health and Safety 
Checklist) in accordance with FEMA Manual 123-9-1  

3.  Submit telework documentation package to supervisor for approval  
4.  Submit approved telework documentation package to the Telework Coordinator 
5.  Update Transit Subsidy application, if required. 

B.  If a telework request is disapproved, the employee will be provided with justification for 

the disapproval. 

C.  The telework arrangement may be terminated in writing by either management or by the 
employee with reasonable advance notice, generally fourteen calendar days, but not less 
than seven calendar days. When an arrangement is terminated by management, the 
supervisor must provide the employee with a brief, written explanation as to why. 

D.  Management reserves the right, normally with one day notice, to require employees to 
return to the official duty location on scheduled telework days, based on operational 
requirements.  Exceptions for a lesser notification may be appropriate in certain 
unforeseen situations.  

E.  With supervisory approval, an employee may report to the office on any regularly 

scheduled telework day. 

66 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
F.  Employees may request to have additional alternate work location approved following 

the procedure in paragraph A above. 

SECTION 4.  TERMS AND CONDITIONS 

A.  Employees who telework must be available to their coworkers, supervisor, and customers 

in the same manner as if they were in their duty location.  Specific communication 
expectations (e.g. use of Microsoft Lync) shall be addressed in the telework agreement, if 
necessary.  

B.  Employee performance for teleworkers and non-teleworkers will be evaluated using the 
same performance management program and standards that cover workers at traditional 
office/duty locations.  This includes providing all employees the same opportunities and 
treatment with regards to work assignments, periodic appraisal of job performance, 
awards, recognition, training and developmental opportunities, promotions, and retention 
incentives. 

C.  While in a telework status, employees will not be treated differently nor will their 

administrative or reporting requirements to their supervisors vary from when working in 
the office (i.e. teleworking employees may only be required to report their status to their 
supervisor or to report on work accomplished or to be accomplished if required to do so 
when present in the office). 

D.  Teleworkers are responsible for ensuring appropriate arrangements for the care of 
dependents at home if the home is their official telework duty location.  That is, 
employees may not use telework to personally care for a dependent.  However, this does 
not preclude a teleworker from having a caregiver working in the home providing care to 
the dependent(s) while he/she teleworks. 

E.  Telework may not be used in lieu of sick leave.  

F.  Time and Attendance, Work Performance and Overtime. 

1.  Time spent in a telework status must be accounted for and reported in the same 
manner as if the employee reported for duty at the official duty station.  The 
employee is required to satisfactorily complete all assigned work, consistent with 
the approach adopted for all other employees in the work group, and according to 
standards and guidelines in the employee's performance plan. 

2.  The employee agrees to follow their normal mission area/agency/staff office 

procedures regarding the requesting and approval of overtime, credit hours, and 
leave that are worked while in a telework status.  

3.  All approved telework hours are to be reported in the WebTA Time Attendance 

and System.  

G.  Teleworking employees continue to be bound by DHS and FEMA standards of conduct 

and performance directives and policies while working at the alternate worksite.  

SECTION 5.  EMERGENCIES 

67 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A.  Employees shall monitor, read and comply with OPM or Agency announcements unless 

otherwise directed by their supervisors.  In situations of emergency closings, late 
openings, or early dismissals, employees shall follow the procedures set forth in FEMA 
Manual 123-9-1, Chapter 3-9.   

B.  The Agency may require any employee to telework in accordance with an activated 

Continuity of Operations Plan (COOP).  

C.  Supervisors may excuse telework ready employees from work and grant annual or 

administrative leave with pay, as appropriate, when an emergency adversely affects the 
telework site (e.g., disruption of electricity, loss of heat, loss of connectivity, etc.), or if 
the teleworker faces a personal hardship that prevents him or her from teleworking 
effectively.  Dependent care needs do not ordinarily entitle a teleworker to administrative 
leave; annual leave will be granted as appropriate. 

SECTION 6.  OFFICIAL TIME FOR UNION REPRESENTATIVES  
In locations where Union office space is not provided, Union representatives may use official 
time in accordance with the Official Time Article while in a telework status.  Union 
representatives must be on an approved telework agreement for such official time to be 
approved.  

68 

 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 20: DISASTER DEPLOYMENT 

SECTION 1.  STATEMENT OF UNDERSTANDING  
The parties acknowledge that all FEMA employees are subject to recall around the clock for 
emergency management operations which may require irregular work hours, work at locations 
other than the official duty station, and may include duties other than those specified in the 
employee’s official position description.  Both parties recognize that emergency assignments 
may change due to circumstances and staff availability at the time an incident or operation 
occurs.  

SECTION 2. DEPLOYMENT   

A.  The parties agree to follow the policies and procedures set forth in FEMA Directive 010-
8 (revised), FEMA Incident Workforce Deployment, dated October 16, 2014, except as 
otherwise provided in this Agreement. 

B.  Employees will be “available for deployment” in the FEMA deployment system unless 

approved by their supervisor of record to be “unavailable for deployment.” 

C.  Employees will be deployed as described in FD-010-8, Section VII. C. 

D.  While on deployment the supervisor of record will take into consideration the fact that 

the employee is deployed in the assignment of job duties.  

E.  Employees can request leave at any time while deployed.  After 30 consecutive days of 
being deployed an employee’s request for leave will not be denied unless the mission of 
the Agency is impacted. 

SECTION 3.  RIGHT TO REPRESENTATION WHILE DEPLOYED   
The parties acknowledge that while on disaster deployment, all FEMA bargaining unit 
employees shall have the same rights and privileges accorded them while at their permanent duty 
station.  Where practical and feasible, these rights shall extend to access to a union official and 
representation. 

69 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 21: TRAVEL 

SECTION 1.  GENERAL 

A.  The Parties agree to follow the policies and procedures set forth in FEMA Manual 122-1-

1 Travel Policy, dated October 23, 2015, except as otherwise provided in this Agreement.   

B.  The parties recognize that employees may be required to perform travel away from their 
official duty station.  When travel is required, employees will be compensated for their 
time and expenses in accordance with applicable law, Government-wide rule or 
regulation, including 5 C.F.R. Parts 550-551 and 41 C.F.R. Chapters 300-301 (Federal 
Travel Regulations) and this Article. 

C.  The Agency agrees to provide information on the FEMA intranet site and offer training 
regarding reimbursable travel expenses, proper use of the travel charge card, use of the 
electronic travel systems, miscellaneous expenses, and per diem.  Employees are 
encouraged to regularly review information on the FEMA intranet site, particularly 
regarding reimbursable expenses and practices addressing travel outside regular working 
hours.   

SECTION 2.  COMPENSATION FOR TRAVEL 

A.  Travel time, whenever possible, should be scheduled during an employee’s regularly 
scheduled tour of duty.  It is recognized that in some cases, no amount of planning or 
scheduling will prevent an employee from being required to travel outside of his or her 
regularly scheduled tour of duty.  

B.  Travel time that counts as hours of overtime work shall be compensated with overtime 
pay or compensatory time in accordance with the applicable law, regulation, and the 
Work Schedules article.   

C.  FLSA Nonexempt Employees.  For FLSA nonexempt employees, travel time is 

considered to be hours of work under either the FLSA exempt employee rules (below) or 
when the time spent in travel status is outside a 50-mile radius of their official duty 
station and they are required to:  

1.  Travel during regular working hours;  
2.  Drive a vehicle or perform other work while traveling;  
3.  Travel as a passenger on a one-day assignment away from the official duty 

station; or  

4.  Travel as a passenger on an overnight assignment away from the official duty 

station during hours on non-workdays that correspond to the employee's regular 
working hours.  

D.  FLSA Exempt Employees.  Time spent in travel status outside a 50-mile radius of an 

employee’s duty station, is considered to be hours of work, if the time spent traveling:  

1.  Is within the days and hours of the regularly scheduled administrative workweek;  
2.  Involves the performance of work while traveling; 
3.   Is incident to travel that involves the performance of work while traveling;  

70 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.  Is carried out under arduous conditions; or  
5.  Results from an event which could not be scheduled or controlled 

administratively. (For example, an employee may be required to travel on a non-
workday, e.g., Saturday or Sunday or travel extends past normal work hours.)  

SECTION 3.  COMPENSATORY TIME FOR TRAVEL 

A.  Compensatory time off for travel is a form of compensatory time off that may be earned 
by an employee for time spent in a travel status away from the employee’s official duty 
station when such time is not otherwise compensable.  Both FLSA exempt and 
nonexempt employees receive compensatory time off for time spent in travel status that is 
not otherwise compensable as hours of work.  

B.  Requests for compensatory time off for travel must be made in advance using WebTA. 

C.  Compensatory time off for travel is credited and used in increments of 15 minutes. 

D.  Forfeiture: Compensatory time off for travel is forfeited: 

1.  If not used by the end of the 26th pay period during which it was earned; 
2.  Upon voluntary transfer to another agency; 
3.  Upon movement to a non-covered position; or 
4.  Upon separation from the Federal Government. 

SECTION 4.  TRAVEL CHARGE CARD 

A.  All employees must comply with the policies and procedures for the travel charge card 
set forth by Federal Regulations, DHS/FEMA policies, and FEMA travel directives. 

B.  All FEMA employees must be issued a government travel charge card unless: 

1.  The employee travels infrequently (less than twice per year) for non-disaster 

purposes; and/or 

2.  The employee’s travel charge card privileges have been suspended or cancelled.   

C.  The travel charge card may only be used for official travel expenses while on TDY travel, 
including charges incidental to travel that may not be reimbursable under applicable law, 
Government-wide rule or regulation.  Employees may not use the travel charge card to 
make personal purchases, obtain cash from automated teller machine (ATM) withdrawals 
unrelated to official TDY travel, or for any other purpose unrelated to official travel.  In 
addition, the card cannot be used for reimbursement of local travel expenses, except when 
authorized (by an approved travel order) for a rental car for a site visit and the purchase 
of gasoline for the rental car’s official use.   

D.  Employee’s whose Travel Charge cards are cancelled or suspended are encouraged to 

utilize the Employee Assistance Program.  

SECTION 5. PROMOTIONAL ITEMS 

71 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In accordance with Public Law 107-107 (the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal 
2002, S. 1438), Employee’s may retain and use promotional items, including frequent flyer 
miles, earned on government travel.   

SECTION 6.  REIMBURSEMENT FOR TRAVEL EXPENSES  

A.  The Agency will reimburse employees for travel expenses through electronic funds 

transfer.  Employees must submit a travel claim (i.e., voucher) within five (5) working 
days after completion of the travel or every 14 days if the employee is on continuous 
travel status.  Employees should expect to receive travel expense reimbursement 
approximately five (5) working days of the Agency’s receipt of a proper travel claim. 

B.  Employees must have an approved travel order before incurring any travel expenses for 

travel to a Temporary Duty (TDY) location. 

C.  An employee may be eligible for per diem when authorized to perform official travel at 

least 50 miles away from his/her Official Station or Residence of Record (ROR) and is in 
"travel status" for more than 12 hours. 

D.  When an employee in travel status becomes incapacitated by illness or injury, the 

employee or authorized representative should notify the employee’s supervisor as soon as 
possible to discuss and determine expenses eligible for reimbursement for return travel to 
the employee’s official duty station in accordance with applicable law and Government-
wide rule or regulation. 

SECTION 7.  METHOD OF TRANSPORTATION 
Employees are expected to travel using the method of transportation that is most economical to 
the Government as determined by the Agency.  When an employee does not travel by the method 
required by the Agency, any additional expenses will be borne by the employee. 

SECTION 8.  LOCAL TRAVEL 
Local travel is official travel 50 miles or less from the employee’s permanent duty station (PDS), 
AWS, or residence of record (ROR). 

SECTION 9.  USE OF ELECTRONIC TRAVEL SYSTEM 

A.  Employees must use the Agency’s designated Electronic Travel System to make all 
reservations for common carrier transportation, lodging, and rental car services. 

B.  If an employee uses an unauthorized travel agent, unauthorized Electronic Travel System, 
or unauthorized travel service such as Orbitz, Travelocity, etc., the employee will be 
responsible for all additional costs that result from the unauthorized use including, but not 
limited to, higher fares and rates, service fees, and cancellation penalties. 

72 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 22: DETAILS AND TEMPORARY PROMOTIONS 

SECTION 1.  GENERAL 

A.  The Parties agree to follow the policies and procedures set forth in FEMA Manual 252-0-
1, Details Program, dated September 22, 2015, except as otherwise provided in this 
Agreement. 

B.  The Parties agree to follow the policies and procedures set forth in FEMA Manual 253-

11-1, Merit Promotion and Internal Placement, dated June 23, 2015, except as otherwise 
provided in this Agreement.   

SECTION 2. DETAILS 

A.  Definition.  Detail.  The temporary assignment of an employee from his or her position of 
record to an established different position or set of unclassified duties for a specified 
period with the employee returning to his or her official position of record at the 
expiration of the detail.  An employee who is on a detail is considered to be occupying 
his or her position of record for all purposes. 

B.  Purpose.  Details may be used to complete emergency or short-term projects; satisfy 

temporary unmet workload requirements; maintain office functions during a 
reorganization, reduction-in-force, or rightsizing; or to accomplish the mission 
requirements of FEMA or other Federal agencies.  Supervisors and managers must follow 
the proper policies and procedures to fairly and accurately affect personnel actions.  

C.  Selecting Employees for Details.  Consideration shall be given to those employees within 
the organizational unit where the detail is to occur or to those employees who show an 
interest or volunteer. 

SECTION 3.  TEMPORARY PROMOTIONS 

A.  Definition. Temporary Promotion. A promotion to a higher graded position on a time 

limited basis. 

B.  Employees selected for temporary promotions must meet the requirements for basic 
eligibility in accordance with applicable regulations of the Office of Personnel 
Management and perform the grade-controlling duties of that position.  

a.  Employees need not be selected under competitive promotion procedures unless 

the promotion is for more than 120 days. 

b.  With the exception of deployments, employees selected for temporary promotions 
to a higher graded position for more than 120 days, will be paid at the higher 
grade for the period they occupy the higher graded position.   

C.  Temporary positions that are expected to last more than 120 days will be advertised and 
filled using competitive selection.  If a temporary promotion which was not advertised 
and filled using noncompetitive selection (i.e., a temporary promotion that was not 

73 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
expected to last more than 120 days) and it is later determined that it will exceed the one 
hundred and twenty (120) days, will be advertised for competitive selection at that time. 

D.  Upon termination of a temporary promotion, the employee will be returned to the 

position from which he/she was promoted, at the pay rate to which he/she would have 
been entitled had he/she not received the temporary promotion. 

74 

 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 23: REASSIGNMENT AND RELOCATION 

SECTION 1.  GENERAL 

A.  When the Agency determines that it is necessary to reassign or physically relocate 
employees, it will provide advanced notification to the Union.  Reassignments and 
relocations (that are not part of a reorganization as covered in Article 24, Reduction of 
Force and Transfer of Functions will be coordinated with the Union in accordance with 
procedures outlined in this Article).  The Parties agree to the implementation measures 
contained in this Article to minimize adverse impact upon employees.    

B.  This Article describes the exclusive negotiated impact and implementation procedures the 

Agency will take when reassigning or relocating an employee.    

SECTION 2.  DEFINITIONS  
For the purpose of this Article: 

A.  “Relocation” means a physical move of the employee (s) in a work unit from one 

worksite (e.g.: office, suite of offices, shop, building) to another.   

B.  “Reassignment” means the change of an employee from one position to another without 

promotion or change to lower grade, level or band.  

C.  “Effective Date” means the calendar day on which the reassignment or relocation will 

take effect.   

SECTION 3.  UNION NOTIFICATION 

A.  When the Agency determines to reassign or relocate up to 10 employees, the Agency will 
give notice to the Union no less than 14 calendar days prior to the effective date.  For 
reassignments which involve more than 10 employees, the notice to the Union will be 
provided 21 calendar days prior to the effective date.  For geographic relocations which 
involve more than 10 employees, the notice to the Union will be provided 30 calendar 
days prior to the effective date.  The Parties agree that the notification will include the 
following information:  

1.  Reason(s) for reassignment or relocation, 
2.   A list with the names, positions, titles and grades of all affected employees and 

their supervisors, 

3.  Floor plans and seating chart(s), drawn to scale, for both the existing and 

proposed organizational locations, 

4.  Whether the proposed relocation is intended to be temporary or permanent and the 

expected duration of residency in temporary space, 

5.  Projected adverse impacts regarding anticipated changes in Union Office space, 
parking facilities, lunch facilities, security provisions, and proximity to public 
transportation, 

6.  Health and safety testing results, if any, 
7.  A proposed implementation schedule and  
8.  Any proposed written employee notices. 

75 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B.  After receipt of the initial notice including the information described above, the Union 

may, as soon as possible, but no later than seven (7) calendar days after receipt, request to 
meet with the Agency Representative for a detailed briefing of the reassignment or 
relocation and to discuss the proposed reassignment or relocation and the information 
supplied with the notification, or to comment or otherwise make suggestions concerning 
the implementation plan.  The briefing and discussion will occur no later than five (5) 
calendar days after the Union’s request.  The Union concerns raised at the meeting 
regarding adverse impact which will result from the proposed change will be discussed.   

C.  The Union may request additional information under 5 U.S.C. § 7114(b) (4), as outlined 

in Article 4, Employee Rights,  

D.  If prior to final implementation, the Agency concludes that a modification of the original 
plan is necessary and employee assignments will change as a result, the Agency shall 
notify and discuss these changes with the Union.   

SECTION 4.  SELECTION OF WORKSPACE 

A.  When employees will be assigned individual offices or workspaces in conjunction with 
relocation, employees will be allowed to choose their office or workspace in accordance 
with this section.  Employees will be allowed to choose from among the offices or 
workspaces designated by the Agency for their assigned work unit.  The Agency shall 
decide the placement of work units consistent with work demands that necessitate that 
functions be adjacent to one another or in specific locations (e.g., sharing equipment or 
customer service).  The order in which employees will be offered a selection is as 
follows: 

1.  Employees on a full time schedule  
2.  Grade 
3.  Time in grade 
4.  FEMA seniority 
5.  Service computation date 
6.  Flip of a coin 
7.  Part time employment status in the same sequence as above. 

Federal employees will get priority for space over contractors and reasonable 
accommodation needs will be honored.   

B.  When employees are being moved to an open work environment, without individually 

assigned workspaces, employees may select a workspace on a first-come-first-serve basis 
each day.  Employees may be required to select a workspace from among the workspaces 
designated by the Agency for their assigned work unit.  In work locations where there are 
regular workspaces and hoteling workspaces, federal employees will have priority over 
contractor employees for the regular workspaces.   

C.  When employees are being moved to a limited seating environment, employees with a 
telework agreement may be required to share workspace and employees without a 
telework agreement may be allowed to select a permanent individual workspace.  If 

76 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
employees are allowed to select a permanent individual workspace, they may be required 
to choose from among the workspaces designated by the Agency for their assigned work 
unit.   

SECTION 5.  EMPLOYEE NOTIFICATION 

A.  The Agency will notify impacted employees of a reassignment or relocation no later than 

seven calendar days prior to the effective date.  

B.  When an employee is being reassigned or relocated to a new geographic area, the 

employee will receive a notice which allows the employee to either accept or decline the 
geographic reassignment.  The notice will include information regarding the 
consequences of declining the reassignment or relocation.   

SECTION 6.  COUNSELING 
Employees may receive counseling, upon request, from EAP or their servicing HR Specialist 
regarding a reassignment or relocation. 

SECTION 7.  DOCUMENTATION 
All reassignment and relocation actions will be documented in the employee’s eOPF.   

SECTION 8.  PERMANENT CHANGE OF DUTY STATION  

A.  When an employee is reassigned to a duty station outside his/her current geographic area, 
the Agency will reimburse the employee for his or her move at the rates authorized in 
accordance with applicable law and Government-wide rule or regulation. 

B.  When the Agency assigns an employee to a position requiring a move to another 

geographic area, the employee may be authorized a house-hunting trip for a reasonable 
period, not to exceed ten (10) calendar days, as authorized by the Agency.  Expenses will 
be authorized in accordance with the Federal Travel Regulation.   

C.  Employees reassigned to a different geographic area who relocate will be allowed a 

reasonable period of time, as necessary, to complete the move and report to work at the 
gaining activity. 

SECTION 9.  TRANSIT SUBSIDIES 
Within 10 days following any reassignment or relocation, employees are required to submit a 
new transit subsidy application, if needed.  

SECTION 10.  TRAINING 
When an employee is reassigned or relocated, sufficient training as determined by the Agency 
will be given to the employee to enable him or her to perform the duties of the new position, 
subject to the availability of funds.   

77 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 24: REDUCTION-IN-FORCE AND TRANSFER OF FUNCTION 

SECTION 1.  GENERAL 
The Parties agree to follow the policies and procedures set forth in FEMA Manual 256-2-1, 
Reduction in Force and Transfer of Function, dated November 6, 2015, except as otherwise 
provided in this Agreement 

SECTION 2.  DEFINITIONS (FEMA MANUAL 256-2-1, SECTION 1-6) 

A.  Reduction-in-Force.  A reduction-in-force means the release of a competing employee 

from his or her competitive level by furlough for more than 30 days, separation, 
demotion, or reassignment requiring displacement, when the release is required because 
of lack of work; shortage of funds; insufficient personnel ceiling; reorganization; the 
exercise of reemployment rights or restoration rights; or reclassification of an employee’s 
position due to erosion of duties when such action will take effect after an agency has 
formally announced a reduction in force in the employee’s competitive area and when the 
reduction in force will take effect within 180 days.   

B.  Transfer of Function.  The transfer of the performance of a continuing function from one 
competitive area and its addition to one or more different competitive areas, except when 
the function involved is virtually identical to functions already being performed in the 
other competitive area(s) affected; or the movement of the competitive area in which the 
function is performed to another commuting area.  A Transfer of Function takes place 
when a function ceases in one competitive area and moves to one or more competitive 
areas that do not perform the function at the time of the transfer, and/or when the entire 
competitive area moves to another local commuting area without any organizational 
change.  

C.  Reorganization.  The planned elimination, addition, or redistribution of functions or 

duties in an organization.  

D.  Furloughs.  The placement of an employee in a temporary non-duty and non-pay status 
for more than 30 consecutive calendar days, or more than 22 workdays if done on a 
discontinuous basis, but not more than 1 year.  

SECTION 3.  WORKFORCE ADJUSTMENTS 
The Agency and the Union recognize that unit employees may be seriously and adversely 
affected by a Reduction in Force (RIF), reorganization, or transfer of function action.  The 
Agency recognizes that attrition, reassignment, furlough, hiring freeze, and early retirement are 
among the alternatives to RIFs that may be available.  This article describes the exclusive 
negotiated procedure the Agency will take when implementing a RIF, reorganization, or transfer 
of function.  It is also intended to protect the interests of employees while allowing the Agency 
to exercise its rights and duties in carrying out the mission of the Agency. 

SECTION 4.  ADVANCE EMPLOYEE NOTICE   

78 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A.  Except in the case of furloughs due to circumstances beyond the control of the Agency, 
the Agency agrees to provide affected employees as much advance notice of reduction-
in-force as is administratively possible.  All such notices shall contain the information 
required by Office of Personnel Management regulations.   

B.  The content of the specific notice shall include the following information:  

1.  The action to be taken, the reasons for the action, and its effective date; 
2.  The employee’s competitive area, competitive level, subgroup and service date, 
and the three most recent ratings of record received during the last four years; 
3.  The place where the employee may inspect the regulations and records pertinent 

to his/her case; 

4.  Reasons for retaining a lower-standing employee in the same competitive level; ,  
5.  Information on reemployment rights;  
6.  The employee’s grievance or appeal rights. 

SECTION 5.  UNION NOTIFICATION 

A.  Except in the case of furloughs due to unforeseeable circumstances beyond the control of 
Management, prior to official notification of employees, the Union will receive fourteen 
(14) calendar days advance notice of any pending reduction-in-force or transfer of 
function, furlough, or reorganization.  

B.  The notice will contain the approximate number and types of positions affected and the 

approximate date of the action.  

C.  If requested by the Union, the Parties will meet in order for the Agency to present 

information on the reduction-in-force, transfer of function, furlough, or reorganization 
procedures and address Union questions.  In addition, upon request, the Parties will meet 
to discuss any concerns prior to implementation.  All meetings must take place within 
seven (7) calendar days of the notice. 

D.  All time limits stated above may be extended by mutual consent of the parties involved.  

SECTION 6.  MINIMIZING ADVERSE IMPACTS  
To the extent feasible, management agrees to utilize the following means and methods to 
accomplish reductions: 

A.  Placement Assistance.  The Agency will assist and counsel affected employees in seeking 
placement opportunities with other Federal agencies or elsewhere in the community;  

B.  Reemployment Within DHS.  In the event career or career-conditional employees are 

separated by reduction-in-force, the Agency will refer these names to the Department of 
Homeland Security (DHS) for inclusion on the appropriate reemployment priority list in 
accordance with the governing regulations.  

C.  Retention Registers.  Employees receiving a reduction-in-force notice have the right to 
review retention lists pertaining to all positions for which they are qualified.  This 
includes the retention register for their competitive level and those for their positions for 

79 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which they are qualified, down to and including those in the same or equivalent grade as 
the position offered by Management.  If separation occurs, this includes all positions 
equal to or below the grade level of their current positions.  Affected employees shall 
have the right to the assistance of the Union when reviewing such lists of records.  

D.  Minimizing the Impact of Automation and Technology Changes.  The Parties agree that 
technological changes such as automation and re-engineering are desirable for the 
efficient operation of the Agency.  However, decisions and actions concerning the impact 
of these changes should be made with a full awareness of employee morale.  In light of 
this, when changes affect the classification or status of positions covered by the 
Agreement, Management will meet with the Union to discuss these changes.  The 
Agency will attempt to minimize the adverse impact of these changes by using attrition 
and reassignment.  

E.  Cooperation of Agencies.  In the event of the transfer of function of the Agency activity 

to another government entity, FEMA will solicit the cooperation of the gaining agency in 
explaining the ramifications of such a change to the Union.  

F.  Employee Training.  FEMA agrees that, when an employee is reassigned due to the 

elimination of their position, sufficient training as determined by Management will be 
given to the employee to enable him or her to perform the duties of the new position, 
subject to availability of funds.  

G.  Retirement and Severance Counseling.  Counsel employees on individual rights relating 

to such matters as retirement and severance pay. 

SECTION 7.  EMPLOYEE RESPONSE TO NOTICE OF OFFER 
Upon receipt of specific notice notifying the employee that he/she is offered a reassignment or 
change to lower grade or will be released from his/her competitive level, the employee will have 
until the end of the specific notice period during which to accept or reject the offer made. 

SECTION 8.  REASSIGNMENT TO A DIFFERENT COMPETITIVE AREA 

A.  Reassignment of employees outside of their competitive area will be avoided when 

possible.  When the Agency is not able to place an employee within the competitive area 
and the employee accepts a reassignment requiring a move to another competitive area, 
the Agency will reimburse the employee for his or her move at the rates authorized in 
accordance with applicable law and Government-wide rule or regulation. 

B.  When the Agency assigns an employee to a position as a result of a transfer of function or 
RIF requiring a move to another geographic area, the employee may be authorized a 
house-hunting trip for a reasonable period, not to exceed ten (10) calendar days, as 
authorized by the Agency.  Expenses will be authorized in accordance with the Federal 
Travel Regulation.   

80 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C.  Employee reassigned to a different commuting area who relocate will be allowed a 

reasonable period of time, as necessary, to complete the move and report to work at the 
gaining activity. 

SECTION 9.  USE OF DUTY TIME 
Employees who are identified for transfer of function, separation, or change to a lower grade as a 
result of a RIF under this Article will be granted up to eight (8) hours, while in a duty status 
without charge to leave for the following: 

A.  Preparing, revising and reproducing job resumes and/or job application forms; 

B.  Participating in employment interviews; and 

C.  Reviewing job bulletins, announcements, etc. 

SECTION 10.  CONTINUATION OF EMPLOYEE BENEFITS   
Upon separation, the employee can continue health insurance free for 31 days after separation.  
An employee can then elect to continue receiving benefits under FEHBP.  The employee must 
request it in writing within 60 days of separation (or within 60 days of receiving a notice from 
the agency that FEHB coverage is terminating).  

SECTION 11. COMPENSATION DURING LAPSE OF APPROPRIATION   
Any employee appropriately authorized to perform work during a lapse of appropriations shall 
be compensated in accordance with applicable regulations.   

SECTION 12.  UNEMPLOYMENT BENEFITS 
The Agency will provide any employee to be separated by RIF or transfer of function with 
instructions on obtaining information regarding unemployment benefits available to them. 

SECTION 13.  DETAILS 
Employees on detail will not be released during a RIF from the position to which they are 
detailed but, rather, from the affected employee’s permanent position of record. 

SECTION 14.  EMPLOYEES DEMOTED BY AGENCY ACTION 
For a period of two years, affected employees demoted by an action covered by this Article will 
be re-promoted to vacancies as they occur according to the following criteria: 

A.  The Agency determines to fill the vacancy; 

B.  The employee has the requisite skills and abilities for the position without the need for 

additional training; and 

C.  Another qualified employee does not have a higher retention standing. 

81 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 25: CONTRACTING OUT 

In the event the moratorium on expending funds in support of OMB A-76 competition activities 
is removed by Congress, the Agency shall notify the Union and the Union shall have the right to 
request to reopen CBA negotiations on the issue of contracting out.  Any agreement reached 
between the Parties will be incorporated as an Appendix to this Agreement.       

82 

 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 26: HEALTH AND SAFETY 

SECTION 1.  GENERAL 

A.  The Parties agree to follow the policies and procedures set forth in FEMA Manual (FM) 
066-3-1, Occupational Safety and Health, dated January 28, 2013, except as otherwise 
provided in this Agreement.  

B.  It is FEMA policy to provide to each FEMA employee a place of employment which is 
free from recognized hazards that are causing, or are likely to cause, death or serious 
physical harm.  This shall be accomplished by the implementation of a comprehensive 
Occupations Safety and Health (OSH) program that reflects the OSH requirements of 
Section 19 of the OSH Act of 1970; Executive Order 12196; and 29 CFR Part 1960.  

C.  The Agency shall maintain an awareness of extreme weather considerations and the 

condition of employees operating within their span of control during emergencies and 
training and ensure that adequate steps are taken to provide for their safety and health.  

D.  Each employee shall comply with the standards, rules, regulations, and orders issued by 
the Agency in accordance with section 19 of the OSH Act, Executive Order 12196, 29 
CFR Part 1960, and FM 066-3-1.   

E.  Specific procedures for preventing and abating safety and health hazards will be 

developed through FEMA Worksite OSH committees and must be approved by FEMA 
Safety Officials before implementation in accordance with 29 CFR 1910, DHS 066-1, 
and FM 066-3-1. 

F.  The Agency will consider input from the Union when purchasing furniture, with regard to 

ergonomic compatibility and employee safety and health.   

SECTION 2. STANDARDS 
The Agency shall comply with OSH Act of 1970, Executive Order 12196, and the OSHA 
standards and requirements that are outlined in the FEMA OSH Program Manual.  

SECTION 3. REPORTING & ABATEMENT OF UNSAFE AND UNHEALTHFUL 
WORKING CONDITIONS 

A.  The following procedure shall be used for submission of FEMA employee reports of 

unsafe or unhealthful conditions and/or practices in the workplace:  

1.  All FEMA employees shall be encouraged to orally or in writing report unsafe or 
unhealthful working conditions and/or practices directly to their immediate 
supervisor who shall promptly investigate the situation and take appropriate 
corrective action.  Supervisors shall keep the reporting employee informed of all 
actions taken;  

2.  Any FEMA employee (or authorized employee representative) may submit a 

written OSH report of an unsafe or unhealthful working condition and/or practice 
directly to the facility OSH Office or the FEMA Headquarters OSH Program 
Office;  

83 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.  Upon receipt of an OSH hazard report, the facility OSH Office shall log in the 
OSH report, contact the originator by telephone to acknowledge receipt, and 
discuss the seriousness of the reported OSH hazard.  The facility OSH Office 
shall advise the responsible supervisor that an OSH hazard has been reported; 
4.  The facility OSH Office shall investigate all OSH reports brought to its attention. 

Alleged imminent danger situations shall be investigated within 24 hours. 
Potentially serious situations shall be investigated within 3 days;  

5.  The facility OSH Office shall provide an interim or complete response in writing 
to the originator of written reports within 10 working days of receipt.  If no 
significant OSH hazard is found to exist, the reply shall include the basis for the 
determination. 

B.  If there is an emergency situation in an office or work area, the first concern is for the 

employees and the public they serve.  Should it become necessary to evacuate a building, 
the Agency will take precautions to guarantee the safety of employees and the public. 

C.  Abatement Procedures: 

1.  In accordance with 29 CFR 1960, an abatement plan will be prepared if the 

abatement of an unsafe or unhealthy working condition will not be possible within 
30 calendar days.  Such plan shall contain a proposed timetable for the abatement 
and a summary of steps being taken in the interim to protect employees from 
being injured as a result of the unsafe or unhealthy working conditions. 

2.  The facility Worksite OSH Committee will be timely notified and consulted, and 
all personnel subject to the hazard shall be advised of interim measures in effect 
and shall be kept informed of subsequent progress on the abatement plan.  
3.  Prior to the establishment of an official abatement plan, the Agency shall take 

interim steps for the protection of the employees. 
4.  The Union will provided a copy of the abatement plan. 

D.  Any equipment, devices, structures, clothing, supplies, tools, or instruments that are 
found to be unsafe will be removed from service, locked-out, and/ or tagged-out or 
rendered inoperative, as appropriate . 

E.   At the request of the Union, the Agency will provide information regarding the 

qualifications of an inspector.    

SECTION 4.  SAFETY & HEALTH TRAINING 

A.  The Agency shall provide safety and health training for employees, including specialized 
job safety training, appropriate to the work performed by the employee.  This training 
will address the Agency’s and the facility’s OSH Program, with emphasis on the rights 
and responsibilities of employees. 

B.  Employees and Union representatives will be provided training as described in FEMA 

Manual, FM 066-3-1.   

SECTION 5.  NO REPRISAL FOR REPORTING 

84 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Agency agrees there will be no restraint, interference, coercion, discrimination, or reprisal 
directed against an employee for filing a report of an unsafe or unhealthful working condition or 
for participating in Agency Occupational Safety and Health Program activities or because of the 
exercise by an employee on behalf of him/herself or others, of any right afforded by Section 19 
of the Occupational Safety and Health Act, Executive Order 12196, 29 CFR 1960, or FM 066-3-
1. 

SECTION 6.  WORK-RELATED INJURIES AND ILLNESSES 

A.  Employees must report any and all work-related injuries to their supervisor as soon as 

possible but no later than 24 hours and in accordance with FM 066-3-1.  If the supervisor 
is not available, then reports on any work related injuries may be submitted to any 
supervisor in the employee’s chain of command.    

1.  Employees must use the Employees’ Compensation Operation & Management 

Portal (ECOMP) to file claims.  The employee has the opportunity to report to the 
health facility/Nurse, his/her personal physician for treatment, or the hospital 
emergency room for treatment and for assistance in the completion of necessary 
reports.  

2.  The Office of Workers’ Compensation Program (OWCP) should be promptly 

notified to ensure timely processing of necessary reports and employee claims.  
Employees who choose to file a claim may contact an OWCP Specialist for 
guidance on the necessary forms and the process for submission.  Upon request, 
employees will be informed of their rights under the Federal Employees’ 
Compensation Act, as amended in 1974. 

B.  If an employee has sustained a work-related injury or illness and the treating physician of 
the injured employee (or nurse of the Agency) certifies that the employee is not capable 
of performing their full duties, the employee may submit a written request to his or her 
supervisor to perform limited duties.  If the request is denied, the employee may submit a 
written proposal to perform limited duty to his or her second-level or third-level 
supervisor.  The proposal shall identify what limited duties the employee believes are 
available and documentation from a treating physician indicating the employee is capable 
of performing such limited duties.  The Parties understand that this provision does not 
obligate Supervisors to create limited duty work or limited duty overtime work but only 
to temporarily assign it to qualified employees to the extent that it is available and 
necessary.  Approved limited duty assignments will be reviewed every 30 days.   

C.  Within seven calendar days after receiving information of an occupational injury or 
illness, the Safety Officer must be notified by the employee to ensure appropriate 
information concerning such injury or illness shall be entered on the log.  The record 
shall be completed within seven calendar days after the receipt of information that an 
occupational injury or illness has occurred. 

SECTION 7.  EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 

A.  Each facility shall have an emergency action plan in accordance with FM 066-3-1.  The 
FEMA Facility Emergency Action Plan shall cover those designated actions FEMA 
employees must take to ensure employee safety from fire and other emergencies.  The 

85 

 
 
 
 
 
Agency agrees that the first concern when an employee is injured on the job is to make 
certain that the employee gets prompt emergency medical treatment.  Doubts over 
whether medical attention is necessary will be resolved in favor of arranging medical 
treatment. 

B.  When it is necessary to assist an employee to return home because of illness or 

incapacitation or to provide transportation to a medical facility, the Agency will assist in 
arranging for transportation. 

C.  The Agency agrees to maintain Automatic External Defibrillators (AED) and adequate 
first aid supplies at each FEMA facility.  All employees will have reasonable access to 
these supplies. 

SECTION 8.  INDOOR AIR QUALITY 

A.  The parties agree that all employees are entitled to work in an environment containing 

safe and healthful indoor air quality. 

B.  The Agency shall work with GSA and building owners to provide safe and healthful 
indoor air quality by conforming to laws, guidelines, and regulations, such as those 
promulgated by OSHA, EPA, and GSA. 

C.  On-site air monitoring, investigations, and inspections for hazardous substances (e.g. 

asbestos, mold) will be conducted in accordance with FM 066-3-1.  

SECTION 9.  SAFETY AND HEALTH RECORDS 
The Agency agrees to compile and maintain records required by the OSH Act and FM 066-3-1.  
The Agency agrees to ensure access by employees, former employees, and Union representatives 
to records/logs of facility occupational injuries and illnesses (including copies of accident 
reports) and to the annual summary of these in accordance with 29 CFR 1960, consistent with 
FOIA and Privacy Act requirements. 

SECTION 10.  HAZARDOUS DUTY PAY AND ENVIRONMENTAL DIFFERENTIAL 
Environment Differentials and Hazardous Duty will be paid in accordance with OPM regulations 
and 5 CFR Part 532.  Employees who believe they may be entitled to Hazardous Duty Pay or 
Environmental Differential may raise the issue with their supervisor or the Office of the Chief 
Component Human Capital Officer (Staffing).  The Employee will be provided with a response 
in writing.   

SECTION 11. FIREFIGHTER OCCUPATIONAL MEDICAL SURVEILLANCE 

A.  FEMA shall conduct an occupational medical surveillance program to assist firefighters 

to maintain optimum health on the job. 

B.  Firefighters will be given a comprehensive medical/physical exam pursuant to NFPA 

1582 or as individual conditions warrant or as FEMA may require. 

86 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C.  Firefighters will schedule their physicals.  Employees will notify supervisor as soon as 

possible with their scheduled physical date. 

D.  FEMA will provide firefighters with all vaccinations for communicable diseases in 

accordance with applicable law, rules, and regulations.  An assessment of the employee's 
coronary heart disease risk factors will be made yearly. 

E.  FEMA will provide additional specialized testing, by a service provider designated by the 
Agency, for the purpose of determining fitness for duty if a medical condition is found. 
The employee will not be charged for this additional testing. 

F.  The Respiratory Protection Program requires that all firefighters will be tested in 

accordance with 29 CFR 1910.134. 

G.  When an annual physical examination discloses a medical condition that in the opinion of 
the examining physician is permanent and will prevent a firefighter from performing the 
full range of his or her assigned duties, the employee has the right to have such findings 
reviewed by his or her private physician at the employee's expense, and the employee 
will be given up to 30 days to obtain and present this additional medical information. 

SECTION 12. PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT 

The Agency will provide required personal protective equipment (PPE) to employees.  
Employees requesting a replacement must submit their replacement requirement to their 
supervisor so the PPE item can be ordered if needed.  If not immediately available, the 
Agency will attempt to obtain the item as quickly as possible.  Once the replacement item 
is received or available the employee will be notified.  After notification the damaged or 
worn items must be turned into their supervisor or designated point of contact and the 
employee will receive the new PPE item. 

87 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 27: FITNESS-FOR-DUTY 

SECTION 1. 

A.  Fitness for Duty Examinations: The Agency may direct an employee to undergo a fitness 

for duty examination only under those conditions authorized in OPM regulations 
(currently found at 5 C.F.R. Part 339, Medical Qualification Determinations) at the time 
the examination is requested or ordered.  If the Agency has reason to believe that an 
employee no longer meets applicable medical standards or physical requirements, it will 
adhere to the OPM regulations and any supplemental Agency policies in order to 
determine whether the employee still meets the necessary requirements/standards for 
employment. 

B.  Under governing regulations, the Agency may order a psychiatric examination (including 

a psychological assessment) after an Agency ordered general medical examination 
indicates no physical explanation for behavior or actions which may affect the safe and 
efficient performance of the employee or others; or the position requires a psychiatric 
examination.   

C.   Office of Workers Compensation Programs:  The procedures in this article are not 

designed to address benefit claims filed with the Department of Labor, Office of Workers 
Compensation Programs (OWCP), for alleged job related injuries.  Employees filing such 
claims must adhere to the OWCP rules, regulations, and policies. 

SECTION 2. 
When the Agency orders or offers a medical examination under the provisions of the OPM 
regulations, it will inform the employee in writing of its reasons for ordering or offering the 
examination and the consequences of failure to cooperate.  Except in emergency situations, an 
employee is entitled to at least seven (7) days advance written notice that s/he is to take a fitness 
for duty examination or psychiatric examination.  In the event that the employee is requested to 
set up an appointment, s/he will be allowed reasonable time to do so.  The notice will set forth 
the reasons for the examination (including the behavior the Employer has observed), and the 
general scope and character of the examination. 

SECTION 3. 
The Parties recognize that, pursuant to 5 C.F.R. 339.303(b), the Agency retains the authority to 
designate the examining physician.  The Employee shall be provided an opportunity to submit 
medical documentation from his/her personal physician or practitioner to the designated 
examining physician.   

SECTION 4. 
It is Agency policy to utilize a licensed practitioner or physician and provide the examining 
physician with a copy of the applicable standards and requirements for the position, and/or a 
detailed position description of the duties of the position. 

SECTION 5. 

88 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Agency will pay all costs for the examination(s) of employees which it orders or offers 
under the provisions of this article.  Employees must pay for medical examinations conducted by 
a private physician or practitioner where the purpose of the examination is to secure a benefit 
sought by the employee such as but not limited to a request for a reasonable accommodation, 
sick leave, advanced sick leave, or FMLA. 

SECTION 6. 
The report of an examination conducted pursuant to this Article will be available to the employee 
pursuant to 5 C.F.R. 293.504(b).  

89 

 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 28: WORKER’S COMPENSATION 

SECTION 1. INFORMATION 

A.  The Agency agrees that as soon as practical after an employee notifies his or her manager 
and/or the appropriate Workers’ Compensation Coordinator (WCC) of an occupational 
disease/illness or traumatic injury/illness in the performance of duty, it will advise the 
affected employee of his/her rights and responsibilities under the Office of Workers’ 
Compensation Program (OWCP), and the Federal Employees Compensation Act 
(FECA).  Additionally, an employee may at any time during the process, request 
information concerning the employee’s rights under this program.  These rights include 
the following: 

1.  The employee’s right to file a claim for compensation benefits; 
2.  The types of benefits available, including continuation of pay (COP), disability 

and death benefits; 

3.  The procedures for filing claim will be posted on the Agency’s Intranet; 
4.  The option to request to use compensation benefits if approved in lieu of sick or 

annual leave; 

5.  The right to representation (e.g., attorney, Union representative, family member 

or friend), upon written designation, with regard to his/her claim; and 
6.  Employees in a travel status are covered 24 hours a day for all reasonable 

incidents of their temporary duty in accordance with applicable Government-wide 
law, rule or regulation. 

B.  The Agency will post information regarding Workers Compensation on the Agency 
intranet site including WCC contact information and information on filing claims.   

SECTION 2. DEFINITIONS 

A.  Traumatic injury/illness – A condition of the body caused by a specific event or incident, 
or series of events or incidents, within a single work day or shift. Such condition must be 
caused by an external force, including stress or strain, which is identifiable as to time and 
place of occurrence and member or function of the body affected; e.g., a fall that causes a 
broken bone. 

B.  Occupational disease or illness – A condition produced by the work environment over a 

period longer than a single work day or shift, e.g., carpal tunnel syndrome.  Occupational 
disease or illness may be produced by such work environment factors as systemic 
infections, continued or repeated stress or strain, exposure to toxins, poisonous fumes, 
noise, etc. 

C.  Continuation of Pay (COP)—If an employee sustains a job-related traumatic injury, the 
Agency must continue the employee’s regular pay during any periods of resulting 
disability, up to a maximum of 45 calendar days, in accordance with the requirements of 
the FECA.  COP is subject to taxes and all other payroll deductions that are made from 
regular income. 

90 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
D.  Disability – Partial or total incapacity due to a work-related injury, to earn the wages the 

employee was receiving at the time of the injury. 

SECTION 3.  PROCEDURES FOR FILING CLAIMS FOR WORKERS' 
COMPENSATION BENEFITS 

A.  As soon as possible after experiencing a job-related injury or illness, the employee should 

contact his/her manager and/or the Workers’ Compensation Coordinator (WCC). 

B.  In order to file a claim for workers’ compensation benefits, the employee should 

electronically complete and submit for his or her manager’s verification the OSHA 301 
and Form CA-1, Federal Employee’s Notice of Traumatic Injury and Claim for 
Continuation of Pay/Compensation, or Form CA-2, Notice of Occupational Disease and 
Claim for Compensation, and/or other necessary forms, located on Department of Labor’s 
DOL’s Employees’ Compensation Operations and Management Portal (ECOMP) website 
located at  https://www.ecomp.dol.gov.  Detailed instructions for completing the 
necessary forms are located on the ECOMP website. 

C.  The appropriate sections of the forms should be filled out by the employee as soon as 
possible, but no later than 30 calendar days from the date of the occurrence.  If the 
employee is incapacitated, this action may be taken by someone acting on his/her behalf. 

D.  If an employee sustains a work-related traumatic injury that requires immediate medical 

examination and/or treatment, the Agency will authorize such examination and/or 
treatment by providing the employee with a Form CA-16 (Authorization for Examination 
and/or Treatment) in accordance with the requirements of the FECA. 

E.  If the employee’s Form CA-2, Notice of Occupational Disease and Claim for 

Compensation is approved, the employee will have the option of buying back any used 
leave of 40 hours or more and having it reinstated to the employee's account in 
accordance with the requirements of the FECA. 

F.  Employees have certain rights under the OWCP/FECA program relating to such issues as 
selection of a medical provider for treatment of an occupational disease or illness or 
traumatic injury/illness, light duty assignment, transfer of medical care, etc.  The Agency 
agrees not to interfere in the employee’s exercise of these rights, as set forth in 20 C.F.R. 
Part 10. 

F.  In order for employees to protect their right to workers’ compensation benefits, 

employees should file their notice of injury or occupational disease within 30 days of the 
occurrence.   However, even if a notice was not filed within 30 days, the FECA (20 
C.F.R. Part 10, Subpart B) allows for claims to be filed within 3 years of the occurrence 
and, under certain circumstances beyond 3 years. 

G.  The Agency will assist employees in obtaining technical information regarding the proper 
procedures for filing claims with the DOL/OWCP.  Such assistance may be obtained by 

91 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
employees electronically or by making contact with the appropriate WCC.   Employees 
should also visit the www.dol.gov website for workers’ compensation information. 

SECTION 4.  CONTINUATION OF PAY 

A.  In order to be eligible for COP, an employee must file a Form CA-1 within 30 days of the 
date the traumatic injury/illness occurred and ensure that medical evidence supporting 
disability resulting from the claimed traumatic injury is provided to the Agency within 10 
calendar days after filing the claim for COP on Form CA-1 and meet any other applicable 
requirements of 20 C.F.R. Part 10.210.  Use the Agency’s Intranet for Workers 
Compensation contact information. 

B.  The Agency must advise the employee of their right to request COP and the need to elect 
among COP, annual, sick, or any other paid leave, (e.g., credit hours or compensatory 
time) or leave without pay, for any period of disability. 

C.  Time lost on the day of traumatic injury that occurs during the employee’s work shift does 

not count toward COP and should be charged as administrative leave. 

D.  COP is not available to employees who file an occupational disease or illness claim 

(Form CA-2). 

E.  If the employee’s claim for compensation is disallowed by the DOL/OWCP or FECA, 

any of the forty-five (45) days of COP that were previously granted will be converted to 
sick leave, annual leave, earned credit hours and/or leave without pay or considered an 
overpayment of pay under 5 U.S.C. 5584.  A conversion option is not available if an 
employee is convicted of fraudulently claiming or obtaining workers’ compensation 
benefits under the Federal Employee’s Compensation Act (FECA).  The employee will 
be responsible for advising the Agency as to which form(s) of leave is (are) appropriate 
using WebTA (or successor system).   

SECTION 5.  RETURN TO WORK 

C.  An employee’s transition back to work depends upon a number of factors, including the 
nature of the injury, the length of the absence, and appropriateness and availability of 
workplace accommodations.   

D.  Priority will be placed on efforts to: 

1.  Establish clear and consistent return to work guidelines for the employee; 
2.  Regular communication with the employee to provide guidance and clarification 

regarding the employee’s duties and performance; and, 

3.  Identifying reasonable workplace accommodations as necessary to maintain the 

effectiveness and productivity of the employee.     

E.  The Agency will make all reasonable efforts to assign employees to duties consistent 

with the employee’s medical needs or offer appropriate employment, in accordance with 
the requirements of 20 C.F.R. Part 10, Subpart F. 

92 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 29: TEMPORARY LIGHT DUTY ASSIGNMENTS   

SECTION 1. GENERAL 

A.  The Parties recognize that temporary light duty assignments are a tool for the Agency to 
continue the productivity of employees who have incurred injuries or illnesses off the job 
that temporarily prevent them from performing their assigned duties.  Light duty 
assignments allow employees to return to work and accomplish the Agency mission 
while temporarily limited by illness or injury.  The Parties agree that Supervisors are not 
required to create light duty work but only to temporarily assign it to qualified employees 
to the extent that it is available and necessary. 

B.  The Agency may assist workers injured or incapacitated off the job in returning to work 
consistent with their medical condition and this Article.  The Parties agree that the length 
of employee absence from the job because of illnesses or injuries may be reduced by 
making light duty available to affected employees in a manner consistent with their 
prescribed medical condition or limitations and the needs of the Agency.   

C.  Any employee who has been injured or incapacitated and is able to perform light duty 

may be permitted to conduct such duties that he or she is able to perform when such duty 
is available, until he or she has recovered from the injury or incapacitation.  This option is 
for injuries of a temporary, rather than permanent nature.   

D.  Light duty assignments may continue for a maximum of 90 days per incident if supported 
by medical documentation.  After 90 days, an employee must return to full duty status or 
request leave as appropriate.  Notwithstanding this Article, an employee may pursue a 
reasonable accommodation at any time if they believe their medical condition is more 
than temporary in nature.   

E.  Light Duty is defined as specific duties and responsibilities that may include all or part of 
an employee’s regular position or that may be outside an employee’s position and that do 
not conflict with the employee’s current work restrictions as identified by the employee’s 
attending physician or practitioner.  Duties may be approved and performed for a full 
work shift (full time) or for shorter time periods (part time).   

SECTION 2. LIGHT DUTY PROCEDURES  

A.  When an employee is injured or incapacitated off the job and is ordered by his or her 

attending physician or practitioner to work light duty, the employee may submit a written 
request to his/her immediate supervisor to perform light duties.  The request must include 
a list of light duties the employee can perform and signed medical documentation from a 
physician or practitioner, which describes the employee’s restrictions or indicates the 
employee may perform the listed light duties and specify the duration of the noted 
restrictions.   

B.  Upon receipt of the request, the supervisor will respond within fourteen (14) days by 

either notifying the employee of the duties that will be made available consistent with the 
stated restrictions, or by denying the request.    

93 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C.  An assignment to light duty appropriate to an employee’s specific medical condition may 
be granted for a temporary period, if such work is available and the assignment will not 
unduly disrupt work operations. 

D.  If a supervisor denies a request for light duty, the supervisor will notify the employee of 
the reasons for the denial.  If denied for medical reasons, the employee will be informed 
that he or she may provide additional supporting medical documentation for 
reconsideration. 

E.  If an extension of the light duty assignment is needed, the employee must request an 
extension supported by updated medical documentation from their physician or 
practitioner, prior to the expiration of the time period originally specified by the 
physician or practitioner.  Temporary light duty assignments may not be extended beyond 
the maximum period stated in Section 1, Paragraph D.  

SECTION 3.  LIGHT DUTY FOR POLICE OFFICERS 
When making light duty determinations regarding Police Officers, the employee’s law 
enforcement responsibilities will be considered.  Various factors, such as the officer’s ability to 
handle a weapon, operate a police vehicle, and make an arrest will be considered when 
determining what light duty assignments are appropriate.  

SECTION 4.  LIGHT DUTY DUE TO PREGNANCY 
A request for accommodation due to pregnancy to protect the health of a pregnant employee 
and/or her unborn child is also covered by this Article.  Subsequent to the confirmation of the 
pregnancy, the employee may request light duty, excusal from wearing a uniform, and other 
accommodations in accordance with Section 2, above.  The period of accommodation may 
continue for the duration of the pregnancy without the need for additional medical 
documentation and without regard to the limitation in Section 1, Paragraph D.  A pregnant 
employee will not be involuntarily restricted from performing her regular duties solely because 
of her pregnancy.     

SECTION 5.  OVERTIME WHILE ON LIGHT DUTY 
Employees will not be precluded from being assigned overtime work based solely on their 
assignment to light duty, as long as light duty overtime work is necessary and working overtime 
is consistent with the employee’s medical restrictions.  

SECTION 6.  LEAVE FOR MEDICAL APPOINTMENTS 
During the time the employee is on light duty, necessary time may be requested and approved for 
medical and physical therapy appointments.  Leave for such appointments will be processed in 
accordance with Article 18, Absence and Leave.   

94 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 30: DRUG TESTING 

SECTION 1. 
The Parties agree to follow the policies and procedures set forth in FEMA Manual 123-20-1, 
Drug-Free Workplace Program, dated July 28, 2014, except as otherwise provided in this 
Agreement.   

SECTION 2.  
All tests and selection procedures will be in accordance with applicable law and Government- 
wide rule or regulation. 

SECTION 3. 
Ordinarily, employees will be granted duty time to take FEMA-sponsored tests that may be used 
for promotion and/or placement in FEMA. 

SECTION 4. 
Prior to implementing a new drug test or changes in the application of ongoing drug tests, the 
Agency will provide notice and, upon request, bargain with the Union to the extent required by 
law and in accordance with the mid-term bargaining provisions of this Agreement.  

95 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 31: EMPLOYEE ASSISTANCE 

SECTION 1. EMPLOYEE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM 

A.  Program Purpose 

1.  The Agency’s Employee Assistance Program (EAP) offers initial assessments, 
short-term counseling, and referrals to employees for a wide range of problems 
that affect the employee’s job performance and/or conduct.  Problems covered by 
EAP include family/relationship issues, workplace concerns, alcohol and drug 
problems, personal and emotional difficulties, health and behavioral issues.  EAP 
also offers coaching services, financial services, legal services, and other 
assistance.   

2.  Employees who think EAP services might be helpful are encouraged to 

voluntarily seek counseling and information on a confidential basis.  Early 
intervention may be helpful in assisting the employee in solving personal issues.  
No employee will be required to use EAP services unless this requirement is 
agreed to in writing as part of a mutually agreed upon settlement of a work-related 
matter. 

3.  Supervisors are also encouraged to note when employees appear to be 

experiencing difficulties for which EAP may provide assistance, and to refer the 
employee to EAP for assistance.   

4.  EAP information will be posted on the FEMA intranet site.   

B.  Confidentiality 

1.  The Parties recognize that employee trust and confidence in the program are keys 

to its success.  The Agency will require the EAP provider to maintain all 
confidential information and records concerning employee counseling and 
treatment in accordance with applicable laws, rules, and regulations. 

2.  Without an employee’s specific written consent, the supervisor may not obtain 

information about the substance of the employee’s involvement with a counseling 
program.   

C.  Voluntary Participation 

1.  An employee will not receive a negative performance rating, be denied promotion 
opportunities, or be subject to disciplinary action or adverse action because of a 
request for counseling or referral assistance. 

2.   Although the existence and functions of counseling and referral programs will be 

publicized to employees, no employee will be required to participate or be 
penalized for merely declining referral to EAP services unless part of a mutually 
agreed upon settlement agreement. 

D.  Relationship to Other Actions.  While EAP is intended to assist employees, EAP is not 
intended to shield employees from corrective action.  Pursuant to a written settlement 
agreement, the Agency may hold in abeyance an administrative action so long as the 
employee agrees to participate in EAP, does not engage in new instances of misconduct 
or performance deficiency, and successfully completes the treatment to which he/she is 
referred.  If the employee fails to meet the requirements of the agreement, the employee 

96 

 
 
 
 
 
may be subject to further administrative action.  This provision only applies in the first 
instance of the problem(s) requiring EAP assistance and does not apply if severe, 
egregious, or criminal misconduct is involved.   

E.  Administrative Leave.  A supervisor or manager may grant up to 1 hour (or more as 

necessitated by travel time or unusual circumstances) of  administrative leave for each 
EAP related counseling session, up to a maximum of 8 total hours, during the 
assessment/referral phase of rehabilitation. 

F.  Leave Associated with EAP.  The Agency may grant leave (sick, annual, or LWOP) for 
the purpose of treatment or rehabilitation for employees under the EAP, in accordance 
with applicable leave policies. 

SECTION 2. CHILD CARE 
Current child care information may be found at the following sites: General Services 
Administration, EAP, OPM.  The Parties agree to explore the possibility of participating in 
Federal child care services where not currently available to FEMA employees.   

97 

 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 32: VIOLENCE IN THE WORKPLACE 

SECTION 1. 
The Parties agree to follow the policies and procedures set forth in FEMA Policy 1200.1, 
Violence in the Work Place, dated November 22, 2000, except as otherwise provided in this 
Agreement. 

SECTION 2. 
The Parties are committed to maintaining a work environment free from violence, threats of 
violence, harassment, intimidation, bullying, and other disruptive behavior.  These behaviors in 
our workplace will not be tolerated.   

SECTION 3. 
Employees have the responsibility to report all disruptive behavior to their immediate supervisor, 
Labor and Employee Relations, or the Office of Chief Security Officer.  All reports of incidents 
will be taken seriously and dealt with appropriately.   

SECTION 4. 
Unacceptable behavior can include oral or written statements, or gestures that communicate a 
direct or indirect threat of physical harm.  Individuals who commit such acts may be removed 
from the premises and may be subject to disciplinary action. 

98 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 33: INVESTIGATIONS 

SECTION 1. 
This Article contains the policy and procedures to be followed when bargaining unit employees 
of the Agency are the subject of, or involved with the investigative and administrative 
interviews.  These policies and procedures will be followed by the Agency and Union 
representatives and employees participating in these interviews/examinations. 

SECTION 2. 
An employee being interviewed by an official representative of the Agency in connection with 
either a criminal or non-criminal matter has certain entitlements/rights regardless of who is 
conducting the interview. 

SECTION 3.  NOTICE 

A.  When the Agency knows in advance that it is going to conduct an interview of an 

employee who is the subject of the investigation, the employee will receive at least two 
days advanced notice, if practicable, that an interview will be conducted. 

B.  When an employee is interviewed by the Agency, and the employee is the subject of an 
investigation, the employee will be informed of the general nature of the matter (i.e., 
criminal or administrative misconduct) being investigated.  

SECTION 4.  EMPLOYEE RIGHTS 
At the commencement of, or as soon as it might become applicable during the course of, an 
investigatory interview, employees will be given notification of all applicable rights including 
Weingarten, Miranda, Beckwith, Kalkines, and Garrity.  This notice shall be on a form that the 
employee signs at the beginning of the interview or such time as the need is identified.    

SECTION 5.  UNION REPRESENTATIVE ROLE 

A.  In accordance with 5 U.S.C. § 7114(a)(2)(B), a representative of the Union will be given 
the opportunity to be present at any examination, involving an employee if the employee 
reasonably believes (either prior to or during the examination,) that a disciplinary or 
adverse action may result and the employee requests such representation.   

B.  When the person being interviewed is accompanied by a representative furnished by the 
Union, in both criminal and non-criminal cases, the role of the representatives includes: 
(1) Conferring with the employee; 
(2) Clarifying questions; and, 
(3) Objecting to intimidation tactics and confusing questions. 

C.  The role of the Union representative is to assure that the investigation is conducted in a 

fair and respectful manner.  However, a Union representative may not disrupt an 
investigation by transforming the interview into an adversarial contest or end the 
interview. 

SECTION 6.  AGENCY RESPONSIBILITIES 

99 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A.  The Agency investigator may, at their discretion, meet in advance with the Union 

Representative for the purpose of discussing the rights of the employee; the role of the 
Union Representative and the investigator’s plans for conducting the interview, breaks, 
conferences. 

B.  The Agency investigator is responsible for conducting and controlling the interview.  In 
the event of a dispute between the Agency investigator and the Union representative, the 
Agency investigator may give the employee the choice of proceeding without Union 
representation or terminating the interview. 

C.  At the conclusion of an investigation governed by this Article which does not result in the 
proposal of any criminal or administrative action, the Agency will notify the subject of 
the investigation of that fact, within 30 days. 

D.  After the interview, the employee being interviewed will be provided with a copy of his 

or her signed statement and signed rights warning forms upon request.  Agency 
representatives, employees, and Union representatives will not, except as specifically 
authorized, disclose information about an investigation.  

100 

 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 34: DISCIPLINARY AND ADVERSE ACTIONS  

SECTION 1.  INTRODUCTION  

A.  The Parties agree to follow the policies and procedures set forth in FEMA Manual 255-3-
1, Employee Discipline Manual, dated December 29, 2015, except as otherwise provided 
in this Agreement.  

B.  The  Agency  has  the  right  and  obligation  to  identify  and  correct  both  conduct  and 
performance deficiencies.  The objective of disciplinary and adverse actions is to promote 
the efficiency of the service.      

C.  When appropriate, the Agency may  consider an  oral  warning or  counseling in  lieu of a 
disciplinary or adverse action.  The Agency generally follows the principle of progressive 
disciplinary action.   

D.  Corrective action can include:  

1.  Non-disciplinary  actions,  such  as  an  oral  warning,  and  an  oral  or  written 

counseling;   

2.  Disciplinary actions, such as letters of reprimand and suspensions of up to 14 days; 

and   

3.  Adverse actions, such as suspensions of 15 days or more, reductions of grade or 

pay, furloughs of 30 days or less, and removal.  

E.  Disciplinary or adverse actions will only be taken for such cause as promotes the efficiency 
of the service.  The Agency will administer disciplinary and adverse action procedures and 
determine penalties for all employees in a fair and equitable manner.   

F.  If the materials relied upon were not provided with the proposal, the employee or his or her 
designated  Union  Representative  may  contact  the  assigned  Employee  Relations  (ER) 
Specialist for a copy of the material relied upon in proposing the action.  

G.  When the Union is designated as the Representative in a disciplinary or an adverse action, 
the employee will notify the ER Specialist, in writing, of such designation.  The designation 
will include the name, address, email address and telephone number of the Representative.  
When  a  representative  has  been  designated,  all  correspondence  will  be  served  by  the 
Agency to the Representative.    

H.  If the employee elects not to be represented by the Union, correspondence will be addressed 
to  the  employee  and  it  will  remain  the  employee’s  prerogative  as  to  whether  he  or  she 
wishes to furnish the Union with copies of such correspondence.  

I.  No record of a complaint determined to be unfounded or not investigated will be placed in 

the employee’s Official Personnel Folder (OPF).    

SECTION 2.  DEFINITIONS  
For the purposes of this Article:    

101 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A.  Day is a calendar day, unless otherwise specified.  

B.  Furlough means the placing of an employee in a temporary status without duties and pay 

because of lack of work, funds, or other non-disciplinary cause.    

C.  Reinstatement means to put back or establish again, as in a former position or state.    

SECTION 3.  TIMELINESS OF DISCIPLINARY AND ADVERSE ACTIONS    

A.  The Agency will initiate disciplinary or adverse action in a timely manner after the facts 
and circumstances giving rise to the action are fully uncovered.  Circumstances that can 
delay the issuance of a proposal or decision letter, include but are not limited to, the need 
to  conduct  a  thorough  investigation  and/or  to  obtain  additional  information  regarding 
particular matters, the need to consult with Employee and Labor Relations or the Office of 
Chief Counsel, the requirement to follow specified procedures, and difficulties in arranging 
meetings where the employee and the deciding official are at different locations.  

B.  Delay in taking a disciplinary or adverse action will not excuse an employee’s misconduct 

or raise a due process issue, but may be a mitigating factor with regard to penalty.  

SECTION 4.  ALTERNATIVE DISCIPLINE 

A.  Alternative discipline is often of benefit to both the employee and the Agency.  Alternative 
discipline  is  a  non-traditional,  constructive  approach  to  addressing  misconduct  or 
performance issues, in lieu of a formal disciplinary or adverse action.  The objectives of 
alternative discipline include:  

1.  Improving  communications  and  interpersonal  working  relationships  between 

supervisors and employees;  
2.  Correcting behavioral problems;  
3.  Reducing the costs and delays inherent in traditional disciplinary actions; and   
4.  Minimizing contentiousness between the Parties.  

B.  Types of Alternative Discipline 
The types of discipline that may be imposed under this type of agreement include, but are not 
limited to: 

1.  Remedial training, as determined appropriate; 
2.  Reduced suspension; 
3.  Serving a suspension on non-duty days; 
4.  Serving a suspension in smaller pieces over the course of multiple pay periods to 

soften the financial impact; 

5.  Serving a suspension that exists only through a written agreement between the 
employee and the supervisor, with no loss of pay or duties.  The documented 
suspension will constitute prior misconduct for purposes of progressive discipline; 

6.  Financial restitution; 
7.  Participation in the Employee Assistance Program and authorization for the 

counselor to talk to the supervisor; or 

8.  Last Chance Agreement.  A Last Chance Agreement (LCA) is an agreement in 
which an employee against whom the Agency has proposed a disciplinary or 

102 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
adverse action agrees to conform to certain conduct expectations for a set period 
of time in exchange for the Agency’s commitment to hold the proposed action in 
abeyance for the same period and upon the successful conclusion, to forego 
imposing the action.  If the employee does not meet his or her obligation under 
the agreement, then the Agency is free to impose the proposed disciplinary or 
adverse action without issuance of a new notice and opportunity to reply.  In any 
subsequent grievance, appeal or other challenge to the disciplinary or adverse 
action, the only issues that can be reviewed are whether the employee conformed 
to the conduct expectations to which he or she had committed in the LCA and 
whether the Agency has abided by the provisions of the LCA.  

C.  Alternative discipline is not an employee right.  The decision to offer alternative discipline 
in any particular case is a matter solely within the Agency’s discretion and may be offered, 
including at the specific request of the employee or his or her Representative, at any stage 
of the disciplinary process, as the Agency determines appropriate.  An offer of alternative 
discipline establishes no precedent or presumption that it will be offered in any other case.   

D.  Any alternative discipline must be contained in a written agreement between the employee 

and the Agency.  

SECTION 5.  DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS:  REPRIMANDS  

A.  An Official Reprimand is considered the mildest level of a disciplinary action.  An Official 
Reprimand is a written disciplinary action which specifies the reasons for the action, places 
the employee on notice that he or she may be subject to more severe disciplinary action 
upon any further offense, and informs the employee that a copy of the reprimand will be 
made a part of his or her OPF.  

B.  An  Official  Reprimand  will  inform  the  employee  that  he  or  she  has  the  right  to  file  a 

grievance over the reprimand under the negotiated grievance procedure. 

C.  An  Official  Reprimand  will  stay  in  the  employee’s  OPF  for  a  period  of  up  to,  but  not 
exceeding,  three  years  or  upon  resignation  or  retirement  whichever  is  earlier.    The 
supervisor has the discretion to determine the period the reprimand will stay in the OPF 
(i.e. one, two, or three years) and to withdraw the reprimand early.  Although an Official 
Reprimand  will  no  longer  be  considered  a  “prior  disciplinary  action”  for  purposes  of 
progressive  discipline  after  it  is  removed  from  the  OPF,  the  fact  that  the  employee  has 
received the reprimand continues to serve as notice to the employee that the underlying 
conduct is unacceptable.  

D.  Where an employee has consistently exhibited exemplary conduct and performance for one 
year following issuance of a reprimand, the Union may make a single written request that 
the reprimand be removed from the employee’s OPF.  The Agency will give good faith 
consideration to the request.  The Agency’s decision on such a request for early removal 
of the reprimand is final and not subject to the negotiated grievance procedure.     

SECTION 6.  DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS:  SHORT-TERM SUSPENSIONS  

103 

 
 
 
  
  
    
 
 
A.  An employee against whom a suspension for 14 days or less is proposed is entitled to:  
1.  An advance written notice stating the specific reasons for the proposed action;  
2.  The right to receive and review materials;   
3.  At least 5 days to respond orally and/or in writing and to furnish affidavits and other 

documentary evidence to a deciding official; and    
4.  Be represented by an attorney or other representative. 

B.  The employee and/or his or her representative, if an employee, will be given a reasonable 
amount  of  official  time  to  prepare  and  present  an  oral  and/or  written  response  to  the 
proposal.  

C.  If the deciding official determines to impose a suspension, the decision will include the 

applicable grievance and/or appeal rights.    

SECTION 7.  ADVERSE ACTIONS:  REMOVAL, SUSPENSION FOR MORE THAN 14 
DAYS, REDUCTION-IN GRADE, REDUCTION-IN-PAY, AND FURLOUGH OF 30 
DAYS OR LESS   

A.  An  employee  against  whom  a  removal,  suspension  for  more  than  14  days,  reduction-in 

grade, reduction-in-pay, or furlough of 30 days or less is proposed is entitled to:  

1.  An  advance  written  notice  of  at  least  30  days  (except  where  a  shortened  notice 
period is authorized by law or regulation, such as 5 U.S.C. § 7513(b) and 5 CFR § 
752.404(d)), stating the specific reasons for the proposed action;  

2.  The right to receive and review materials;  
3.  At least 14 days to respond orally and/or in writing and to furnish affidavits and 
other documentary evidence to a deciding official (normally at a level higher than 
the proposing official); and    

4.  Be represented by an attorney or other designated representative.  

B.  The employee and/or his or her representative, if an employee, will be given a reasonable 
amount  of  official  time  to  prepare  and  present  an  oral  and/or  written  response  to  the 
proposal.  

C.  If the deciding official determines to impose an adverse action, the decision will include 

the applicable grievance and/or appeal rights.  

SECTION 8.  MEDICAL CONDITION  
An employee who wishes consideration of any medical condition that the employee claims has 
contributed to a conduct, performance or leave problem shall supply supporting medical 
documentation within the time limits allowed for the employee’s response to the proposal notice.   

SECTION 9.  AGENCY DECISIONS   

A.  Where the Agency proposed a form of discipline or adverse action covered under Sections 
6 or 7 of this Article, it will follow the procedural requirements of law, regulation, and this 
Agreement in rendering a written decision.  The decision will state the specific reason(s), 
the effective date, the action to be taken, and the employee’s appeal and grievance rights 
regarding the decision.     

104 

 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
B.  In  arriving  at  its  written  decision  on  any  proposed  disciplinary  or  adverse  action,  the 
Agency shall only consider the materials or information provided to the employee.  The 
Agency  shall  consider  any  timely  response  that  the  employee  and/or  his  or  her 
representative  made  to  a  designated  official  and  any  timely  medical  documentation 
furnished.    

SECTION 10.  UPDATES TO PERSONNEL ACTIONS  
Where it has been ultimately determined through administrative action or applicable third party 
adjudication that a disciplinary or adverse action was unjustified or unwarranted, the Agency will 
take whatever action is required to correct the employee’s personnel and pay records, in 
accordance with law and regulation.  

SECTION 11.  REQUESTS FOR TIME EXTENSIONS  
A reasonable request for an extension of time will be granted with a showing of good cause.  
Absent extraordinary circumstances, such requests must be made at least two workdays in 
advance of the deadline 

105 

 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 35: GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE 

SECTION 1.  PURPOSE   
The purpose of this Article is to provide an equitable, simple and expeditious means of 
processing grievances.  This negotiated procedure shall be the exclusive procedure available to 
the Union and employees in the unit for resolving grievances which come within its coverage, 
except as specifically provided below in Section 4.   

SECTION 2.  UNION INVOLVEMENT 

A.  Designation of a Union representative must be in writing and the designated representative 
must have the authority to act for the Union and Grievant.  An employee may pursue a 
grievance with or without Union representation.   

B.  When an employee grievance is presented to the Employer without Union representation, 
the Union will be provided a copy of the grievance and given an opportunity to be present 
during the proceedings unless the employee objects.  If the employee desires representation, 
the Union shall be the sole representative for any grievance processed under this article. 

SECTION 3.  DEFINITION 
A grievance means any complaint:  

A.  by any unit employee concerning their conditions of employment;   

B.  by the Union concerning conditions of employment of any employee or alleged contractual 

violations by the Agency;  

C.  by any unit employee, the Union, or the Agency concerning: 

1.  The effect or interpretation, or a claim of breach, of this Agreement; or 
2.  Any claimed violation, misinterpretation, or misapplication of any law, rule, or 

regulation affecting conditions of employment.  

SECTION 4.  EXCLUSIONS 
The following matters are excluded from this grievance procedure and any grievance consisting of 
the matter below may be rejected: 

A.  Matters which are not subject to control by Agency management or control by the Union. 

B.  Any claimed violation of Subchapter III of Chapter 73 of Title 5, U.S.C. (relating to 

prescribed political activities). 

C.  Disputes over retirement, life insurance or health insurance. 

D.  A suspension or removal under Section 7532 of Title 5 U.S.C. (related to national security). 

E.  Disputes over any examination, certification or appointment. 

F.  Disputes over the classification of any position, which does not result in the reduction in 

grade, or pay of an employee.  

106 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
G.  Disputes over the non-selection for promotion from a group of properly ranked or certified 
candidates.  This does not apply to the right to grieve over improper procedures used during 
the selection process.  

H.  Disputes over the termination of temporary promotion. 

I.  A separation action while serving under a time limited appointment. 

J.  The content of performance standards and elements. 

K.  The non-adoption of a suggestion or disapproval of a discretionary award.  This exclusion 

does not apply to the right to grieve over improper procedures used in the process.  

L.  The separation of employees in their probationary period. 

M.  Performance Improvement Plans, interim ratings, and any progress review that is not a 
rating of record.  This exclusion does not apply to the right to grieve over improper 
procedures used in the process. 

N.  Preliminary notice of a proposed action, which, if effected, would be covered by this Article 

or excluded by a. through e. above.   

O.  An oral warning, oral counseling, or written counseling.   

P.  Allegation of Discrimination.  A complaint of discrimination which is listed in 5 U.S.C. § 
2302(b)(1) if the employee has elected to use an available complaint procedure provided 
by statute, such as the Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) process.  The employee 
may use the grievance procedure if the employee chooses not to use the EEO process.    

Q.  An appeal of an adverse action based on performance under 5 U.S.C. § 4302 or 

misconduct under 5 U.S.C. § 7512 if the employee has elected to file an appeal under the 
statutory appeal procedure provided under 5 U.S.C. § 7701 or its implementing 
regulations.  The employee may use the grievance procedure if the employee chooses not 
to use the Merit Systems Protection Board (MSPB) statutory appeal procedure.   

R.  Where the relief requested is the same, matters which can be raised under the grievance 
procedure or as an unfair labor practice may, in the discretion of the aggrieved party, be 
raised under either procedure but not under both procedures. 

SECTION 5.  IDENTICAL OR "GROUP" GRIEVANCES 
In the case of identical grievances involving separate employees, the grievance may be 
consolidated by either Party.  One employee's grievance shall be selected by the Union for 
processing as the "lead grievance."  In such cases, all decisions on that "lead grievance" will be 
binding on the other grievance(s).  The Parties agree that for the purposes of this section, 
identical grievances are those arising from a common set of circumstances which adversely 

107 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
affect the grievants in the same manner where all of the witnesses would be testifying to the 
same or substantially similar facts.  The term "substantially similar" means facts which are 
sufficiently alike so that a reasonable person would conclude that application of the same rules to 
the facts in each grievance would result in the same conclusions with regard to the outcome of 
those grievances.  If a Party objects to the consolidation, the question of consolidation shall be 
referred to FEMA’s Alternative Dispute Resolution Division for a final determination. 

SECTION 6.  TIME LIMITS 
All time limits in this Article may be extended by mutual consent.  Failure of the Agency to observe 
the time limits shall entitle the employee/Union to advance the grievance to the next step.  Failure of 
the employee to observe time limits will automatically terminate the grievance.   

SECTION 7.  QUESTION OF GRIEVABILITY 
In the event either party should declare a grievance non-grievable, the original grievance shall be 
considered amended to include this issue.   

SECTION 8.  RESOLUTION AT LOWEST LEVEL POSSIBLE 
Most grievances arise from misunderstandings or disputes, which can be settled promptly and 
satisfactorily on an informal basis at the immediate supervisory level.  Every effort will be made by 
the parties to settle grievances at the lowest possible level.  Improving such communications, and 
applying fairness and good faith in the actions between the employees and managers through 
good working relationships is encouraged in order to promote efficiency and to avoid grievable 
matters.  At any time during the grievance process, the Parties may attempt to resolve a 
grievance informally.  If relief is granted, and employee accepts the grievance will be closed at 
that step, and no further processing will take place.  If the grievant continues to the next step, the 
relief offered at the lowest step will not be implemented.  

SECTION 9.  INDIVIDUAL GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE 
Grievances initiated by an employee or the Union on behalf of an employee or employees will be 
processed in accordance with this section. 

A.  STEP 1.  A Step 1 grievance must be presented within fifteen (15) calendar days from the 

date the grievant knew or should have known the action or decision occurred.  
Grievances must be presented in writing to the management official one level above the 
manager responsible for the action or decision being grieved.  Grievances may be 
rejected if the following information is not included:  

1.  Name(s) of the grievant(s); 
2.  The specific occurrence or condition giving rise to the grievance; 
3.  The provisions of law, regulation, or Agreement allegedly violated, misapplied or 

misinterpreted; 

4.  Any relevant evidence, and 
5.  The remedy sought. The relief sought must be personal to the employee. A 

Grievant may not seek to have another individual penalized or rewarded through 
this procedure. 

Within 28 calendar days after receiving the grievance, the management official shall 
render his or her written response. 

108 

 
 
 
 
 
 
B.  STEP 2.  If the grievant is not satisfied with the Step 1 grievance decision, or if the Step 1 
decision was not provided in the allotted time, the grievant may file a Step 2 grievance in 
writing to the management official one level above the Step 1 official.  The Step 2 
grievance must be presented within 7 calendar days after receipt of the Step 1 decision or 
within 7 calendar days of the date the Step 1 decision was due.  The step 2 grievance must 
include: 

1.  Step 1 grievance and response (if any); and 
2.  Any additional relevant evidence.  

Within 7 calendar days of receipt of the Step 2 grievance, the Step 2 management official 
(or designee) will meet with the grievant and/or representative if a meeting was requested 
in the Step 2 grievance.  Within 21 calendar days after the date of the meeting or within 
28 calendar days after receipt of the Step 2 grievance if no meeting was requested, the 
Step 2 management official shall render his or her written response.   

C.  STEP 3.  If the grievant is not satisfied with the Step 2 grievance decision, or if the Step 2 
decision was not provided in the allotted time, the grievant may file a Step 3 grievance in 
writing to the management official one level above the Step 2 official.  The Step 3 
grievance must be presented within 7 calendar days after receipt of the Step 2 decision or 
within 7 calendar days of the date the Step 2 decision was due.  The Step 3 grievance must 
include the following information: 

1.  Step 1 grievance and response (if any); 
2.  Step 2 grievance and response (if any); and 
3.  All evidence relevant to the grievance. 

Within 28 calendar days after receipt of the Step 3 grievance, the Step 3 management 
official shall render his or her written response.   

D.  Arbitration.  If the grievant is dissatisfied with the Step 3 decision, the Union President 
(or designee) may invoke arbitration as provided in the Arbitration Article.  During 
arbitration the grieving party may only present evidence that was submitted with the Step 
3 grievance. 

SECTION 10.  UNION OR AGENCY GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE.   
Grievances initiated by the Employer or the Union will be processed in accordance with the 
following steps: 

A.  STEP 1.  The grieving party will present the grievance in writing to the other party within 
fifteen (15) calendar days from the date the party became aware of the action or incident 
being grieved.  A Union grievance must be presented in writing to the Labor Relations 
Officer.  An Agency grievance must be presented in writing to the Council President.  
Grievances may be rejected if the following information is not included:   
1.  The specific occurrence or condition giving rise to the grievance; 
2.  The provisions of law, regulation, or Agreement allegedly violated, misapplied or 

misinterpreted; 

3.  Any relevant evidence, and 
4.  The corrective action desired.   

The Parties will meet within 10 calendar days after receipt of the grievance to discuss the 

109 

 
 
 
 
 
grievance.  The party filing the grievance will be furnished a decision by the other party 
within 10 calendar days from the date of this meeting.  Nothing herein will preclude either 
party from attempting to resolve the grievance informally. 

B.  Arbitration.  If either the Union or Management is dissatisfied with a Step 1 decision, 

the Union President or Labor Relations Officer may invoke arbitration as provided in the 
Arbitration Article.  During arbitration the grieving party may only present evidence that 
was submitted with the Step 1 grievance. 

SECTION 11.  SERVICE OF PROCESS  

A.  Service of grievances and the decisions thereon, including arbitration notices shall be 

accomplished by email or personal delivery.  Grievances and responses will be deemed 
timely if the email is sent or personal delivery is accomplished by midnight, local time, 
within the specified time limit.   

B.  Response time periods will begin to run from the date the recipient receives a document 
in person, the date indicated on an automatically generated read receipt if sent between 
government email accounts or the date of a return email acknowledging receipt if sent to 
or from a non-government account.  If no read receipt or acknowledgement is sent from 
the recipient, the relevant time period will begin on the day after the date the email was 
sent.  The Parties agree that they will act in good faith in receiving documents and will 
not attempt to evade the service of documents.  

110 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 36: ARBITRATION 

SECTION 1.  INVOKING ARBITRATION 
Arbitration may only be invoked by the Union or Agency.  Invocation for arbitration will be filed 
with the Agency labor relations officer (employee or Union grievance) or the Council President 
(Agency grievance).  If the Agency and the Union fail to settle any grievance processed under 
the negotiated grievance procedures, such grievance, upon written request by the Union, may be 
submitted to arbitration within thirty (30) calendar days from the date the Step III individual 
grievance decision is received or was due or the Step 1 Union or Agency grievance decision is 
received or was due.  Demands to invoke arbitration must clearly identify the grievant and 
subject matter.  

SECTION 2.  SELECTION OF ARBITRATOR 

A.  No more than 5 calendar days after the date of the notice to invoke arbitration, the 

moving party will request the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Services (FMCS) to 
provide a list of seven impartial persons to act as an arbitrator.  

B.  Within 7 calendar days after receipt of the FMCS list the Parties shall select an arbitrator. 

The moving party will make initial contact with the defending party to select an 
arbitrator.  If for any reason the defending party refuses to participate in the selection of 
an arbitrator, the moving party will be empowered to select the arbitrator from the list.  

C.  Arbitrator selection may be done by in person, by email, telephone, or web conferencing. 
If the parties cannot mutually agree on one of the listed arbitrators, then Agency and the 
Union will alternatively strike one potential arbitrator from the list of seven and will then 
repeat the procedure until one name remains.  The remaining person shall be the duly 
selected arbitrator.  The parties will flip a coin to determine who strikes the first name.  

D.  Following the selection, the moving party will, within 7 calendar days, notify the FMCS 
of the name of the arbitrator selected.  A copy of the notification will be served on the 
other party.  

E.  If an arbitrator is not selected within 30 calendar days of the invocation, the arbitration 

will be dismissed with prejudice.  

F.  The time limits may be extended by mutual consent.  

SECTION 3.  THRESHOLD ISSUES 

A.  Arbitrators Decision.  All disputes of grievability or arbitrability in a grievance advanced 
to arbitration shall first be raised by written submission to the arbitrator prior to any 
proceedings on the merits.  The arbitrator is without jurisdiction to accept evidence or 
issue a decision on the merits until a decision on the threshold issue(s) of 
grievability/arbitrability has been rendered.  

B.  Postponement.  If either party raises an arbitrability question later than fourteen (14) 

calendar days prior to the date scheduled for a hearing, the other party shall have the right 

111 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to postpone the hearing, if it deems postponement necessary.  Any additional costs by the 
arbitrator for cancellation required by the late notification, as to the arbitrability issue, 
shall be borne by the party raising the question.  

SECTION 4.  PRE-ARBITRATION CONFERENCE  
Not later than the 30th day after the date that arbitration is invoked, the Parties shall conduct a 
pre-arbitration settlement conference.  At such settlement conference, the Parties shall make 
good faith efforts to reach a resolution of the case.  The content of such settlement discussions 
are confidential.  Any statements made during the settlement discussions specific to the 
settlements, and any portions of written materials revealing the contents of such settlement 
discussions may not be introduced in proceedings before the arbitrator.  

SECTION 5.  TRANSCRIPTS 

A.  Each party will inform the other no later than fourteen (14) calendar days prior to the start 

of the arbitration hearing whether it desires a transcript of the hearing.  

B.  If the Parties mutually agree upon the need for a transcript, they shall equally share the 

cost of the transcript and the Agency will make the arrangements for securing a 
transcript.  

C.  If the Parties do not agree on the need for a transcript, the party desiring a transcript will 
arrange for the transcript and will bear the full cost.  However, should the other party 
change its mind and seek a copy of the transcript, it shall then be responsible for half of 
the costs. 

SECTION 6.  PROCEEDINGS 

A.  Each party has the obligation to cooperate promptly with the designated arbitrator in 
setting a date for a hearing.  Failure of either party to proceed with due diligence in 
responding to an offer of dates may serve as a basis for establishment of a hearing date by 
the arbitrator or dismissal of the grievance.  

B.  No later than fourteen (14) calendar days prior to the hearing, the parties shall exchange 
proposed: issue(s) statement, list of witnesses with a brief synopsis of the anticipated 
testimony for each witness, and a list of joint exhibits.  No later than seven (7) days prior 
the hearing, the Parties will attempt to agree on and submit to the arbitrator a joint list of 
issues, witness(es), and exhibit(s).  If the Parties cannot agree on the joint list of issues, 
witnesses, or exhibits, the Parties may submit individual proposed lists to the arbitrator.  A 
copy of the submission will be simultaneously served on the other party.  It shall be at the 
sole discretion of the arbitrator to determine the issue(s), witness(es), and exhibit(s).      

C.  The arbitrator shall render his or her decision as quickly as possible; but, in any event, no 
later than thirty (30) calendar days after the conclusion of the hearing unless the Parties 
mutually agree to extend the time limit.  If no exception is filed during the thirty calendar 
day period beginning on the date the award is served, the award is final and binding.  
Either party will take the actions required by the final award within sixty (60) calendar 
days after it becomes final and binding, except as provided by the Award.  

112 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION 7.  COSTS 

A.  The arbitrator’s fee and the expenses of the arbitration, with the exception of transcripts, 

shall be borne equally by Agency and the Union.  

B.  Any fee or expense incurred in the process of requesting a panel of arbitrators shall be 

borne by the moving party.  

C.  Fees to be paid by the Agency will be governed by existing regulations.  Travel and per 

diem shall not exceed that authorized by government-wide regulations.  

D.  Cancellation Costs.  The Parties will share any cancellation costs equally when the 

pending issue is settled prior to the hearing.  If one party cancels the hearing, that party 
shall be responsible for paying any costs associated with the cancellation.  

SECTION 8.  LOCATION OF HEARING  
The arbitration hearing will be held, if possible, on Agency’s premises during regular business 
hours.  The arbitration will normally be held within the commuting area of the grievant unless 
the grievant has transferred from the site of the dispute.  In such cases the hearing will be held at 
the site of the dispute unless both Parties agree to hold it in another location.  Arbitration 
hearings regarding group or consolidated grievances will be held at a mutually agreed upon site.  

SECTION 9.  PARTICIPANTS 

A.  The Union shall designate, in writing, one representative to represent the Union or Grievant 
in the Arbitration.  The designated representative shall have authority to act for the Union 
and Grievant.  The Union will be permitted to appoint a Union representative as an observer 
in any arbitration hearing at which the Union has designated a non-FEMA individual as its 
representative.   

B.  Duty Status.  All participants in the hearing shall be in duty status or on official time, if 
they would otherwise be in a duty status.  If a hearing is scheduled on what would 
otherwise be a participant’s day off, the Agency will adjust the employee’s schedule so 
that the employee would be in a duty status.  

C.  Travel and Per Diem.  Where the witnesses are not within the commuting area of the 

hearing site, and where the witnesses are deemed approved by the arbitrator, Agency will 
pay travel and per diem for them.  Should there be a disagreement as to the relevance of a 
witness where travel and per diem is required, the Union will pay travel expenses and the 
issue will be presented to the arbitrator who will decided on the relevancy of the 
testimony.  If the arbitrator decides that the witness is relevant, the arbitrator will so state 
in the decision and Agency will pay travel and per diem at a rate no greater than that 
authorized by the government travel regulations.  

SECTION 10.  AUTHORITY OF ARBITRATOR 

A.  The Agency and the Union agree that the jurisdiction and authority of the selected 
arbitrator and his/her opinions, as expressed, will be confined exclusively to the 

113 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
grievance at issue between the parties.  The arbitrator is restricted to making a decision 
specifically and solely on the question(s)/issue(s) submitted.  The arbitrator’s decisions 
shall be final and binding subject to the Parties’ right to take exceptions to an award and 
the Federal Labor Regulations Authority sets aside all or a portion of the award, or for 
enforcement purposes.  However, any adverse appeals shall be presented to the 
appropriate appellate jurisdiction.  

B.  The Arbitrator does not have the authority to disregard, circumvent, or otherwise proceed 

in any matter inconsistent with any provisions of this Agreement.   

SECTION 11.  EX PARTE COMMUNICATIONS  
With the exception of the discussions regarding scheduling, both Parties agree that there will be 
no communication with the arbitrator unless both Parties are participating in the communication 
or one party has expressly agreed to the communication by the other party with the arbitrator. 

114 

 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 37: ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION (ADR) 

SECTION 1.  
The Agency and the Union are committed to the use of ADR problem solving methods to foster 
a good labor-management relationship.   

SECTION 2.  
ADR is an informal process which seeks early resolution of employee, labor, and management 
disputes.  Participation in the ADR process must be voluntary.   

SECTION 3.  
ADR uses non-adversarial methods to help the Parties seek a fair and equitable resolution.  ADR 
is a positive approach to joint problem-solving that might not be available through the traditional 
methods of resolving issues.  ADR focuses on the parties’ real interests, rather than their 
positions or demands. 

SECTION 4. 
ADR may be initiated at any time if all interested parties (i.e., supervisor, employee, and 
employee’s union representative) are willing to participate in the ADR process.  Any individual 
participating in the ADR process has a right to request and have a representative present.   
Resolutions under ADR cannot be in conflict with or supersede any agreements between the 
Parties.   

SECTION 5. PRINCIPLES OF ADR 
Either party can refuse to participate or withdraw from the ADR process.  The ADR Advisor has 
discretion to determine whether a certain case or issue is suitable for ADR and what type of 
ADR tool is appropriate.  The ADR process involves many tools for resolving workplace issues, 
including, but not limited to, facilitation, conciliation, conflict coaching, team dynamic inquiry, 
mediation, and/or any combination thereof. 

SECTION 6. GROUP COMPLAINT 
A group of employees with the same issues may present one complaint as a group.  The group 
should identify one person as its representative.  If the employees in the group work for different 
supervisors, the Director, LER Branch, should be consulted by ADR to identify the appropriate 
supervisory official to whom the group should present the complaint.   

SECTION 7. CANCELLATION OF A COMPLAINT 
A complaint may be cancelled for the following reason(s): 

A.  At the request of the complainant; 

B.  If the complainant does not furnish required information and/or does not proceed in a 

timely manner with the advancement of the complaint. 

SECTION 8. 
ADR may NOT be appropriate when: 

A.  A definitive or authoritative resolution of the matter is required for precedential value, 

115 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and such a proceeding is not likely to be accepted generally as an authoritative 
proceeding, 

B.  The matter involves or may bear upon significant questions of government policy that 

require additional procedures before a final resolution may be made, and such a 
proceeding would not likely serve to develop a recommended policy for the Agency, 

C.  Maintaining established policies are of special importance, so that variations among 
individual decisions are not increased and such a proceeding would not likely reach 
consistent results among individual decisions, 

D.  The matter significantly affects persons or organizations that are not parties to the 

proceedings. 

E.  A full  public record of the proceeding is important, and a dispute resolution proceeding 

cannot provide such a record; and 

F.  The agency must maintain continuing jurisdiction over the matter with authority to alter 

the disposition of the matter in the light of changed circumstances, and a dispute 
resolution proceeding would interfere with the agency’s fulfilling that requirement. 

SECTION 9. 
The Agency shall make available to employees information describing the Agency’s ADR 
processes and contact information for the ADR division.  

116 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 38: EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY 

SECTION 1.  STATEMENT OF POLICY 
In accordance with FEMA Directive, FD 112-14, Equal Opportunity and Affirmative 
Appointment, dated July 10, 2015, and FEMA Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) Policy 
Statement, 401-123-1, dated October 13, 2015, the Agency will not discriminate based on race, 
color, religion, sex, national origin, age (over 40), disability, genetic information, reprisal, or 
sexual orientation.    

SECTION 2. CHOICE OF FORUM 
An employee has the option of filing a grievance in accordance with Article 35 or a complaint 
under the statutory EEOC Federal Sector EEO complaint procedure, but not both.   

SECTION 3.  ANNUAL TRAINING 
The Agency will provide and all employees must comply with annual EEO training 
requirements.    

SECTION 4.  EEO RESPONSIBILITIES 

A.  Managers and Supervisors. With respect to conduct between officials, supervisors, 
managers and employees, Agency officials, supervisors and managers have a 
responsibility to maintain a discrimination-free environment to the extent required by 
law.  

B.  Fellow Employees.  With respect to conduct between fellow employees, employees have 
a responsibility to maintain a discrimination-free environment to the extent required by 
law.  

C.  Sexual Harassment.  

1.  The Agency agrees to provide all bargaining unit employees a work atmosphere 

free from sexual harassment.  

2.  In accordance with Agency policy, any employee who believes he or she has been 
the victim of sexual harassment or has knowledge of sexual harassment must 
promptly report it.  

3.  Where an allegation of sexual harassment is brought to the attention of the 

Agency, the Agency will take appropriate action. 

SECTION 5.  USE OF EEO COUNSELORS 

A.  EEO Contact Information.  The Agency shall make available contact information for 

employees to contact an EEO Counselor.  

B.  Neutrality of EEO Counselor.  The EEO Counselor shall not in any way attempt to 
restrain an employee from filing an EEO complaint, nor may an EEO Counselor 
encourage an employee to file an EEO complaint.  

117 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C.  Confidentiality.  The EEO Counselor shall not reveal the identity of an aggrieved 

employee who has come to him or her for counseling, except when authorized to do so by 
the aggrieved employee, until a written EEO complaint has been filed.  

D.  Independence of EEO Counselor.  EEO Counselors shall be free from restraint, 

interference, coercion, discrimination, or reprisal in connection with the performance of 
their duties.  

SECTION 6.  UNION RIGHTS 

A.  Notification of Change.  If at any stage of the complaint process under procedures 
covered by this Article, the Agency determines to resolve the complaint by making 
changes to personnel policies and practices or matters affecting the general working 
conditions of unit employees, the Union will be afforded reasonable notification.  

B.  Conflict with Contract.  

1.  Notice and Opportunity to Bargain.  Where the corrective or remedial action to be 

taken as a result of statutory adjudicatory procedures would conflict with or 
appear to conflict with, the provisions of this Agreement, the Agency shall afford 
the Union reasonable notification and opportunity to negotiate the impact of the 
Agency’s action effectuating the decision.  

2.  Priority of Appellant Decisions.  The provisions of this Agreement may not serve 
to prevent implementation of statutory equal employment opportunity decisions 
(of, i.e., the Merit Systems Protection Board, the Equal Employment Opportunity 
Commission or the Federal courts). 

3.  Union Right to be Present.  If the employee elects to pursue the complaint under 
the grievance procedures of this Agreement and he or she elects to process the 
grievance without representation, the Union shall have the right to be present at 
any meeting between the Agency and the employee concerning the grievance 
unless the employee objects to the presence of a union representative.  

SECTION 7.  DIVERSITY MANAGEMENT ADVISORY COUNCIL (DMAC) 

A.  The parties agree that the Union may participate with the Agency in DMAC for the 
purpose of advising the Administrator’s Office on the continuing implementation of 
diversity and EEO issues as it applies to bargaining unit employees.   

B.  Diversity and EEO issues are appropriate topics of discussion for local partnership 

meetings.   

118 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 39: PARKING AND TRANSPORTATION 

SECTION 1.  PARKING SPACES, WHERE AVAILABLE 

A.  To ensure that FEMA-controlled parking facilities are operated in a manner responsive to 
the needs of the Agency, assignment of FEMA-controlled parking spaces will be in 
compliance with applicable Government-wide parking policies issued by the General 
Services Administration (GSA), Federal Property Management Regulations (FPMR), and 
Code of Federal Regulations provisions.  At locations where parking is provided, parking 
fees, if any, shall be assessed to recover the cost of operating a parking facility 

B.  All employees must register their vehicle(s) in accordance with Agency parking policies. 
Employees will notify designated Agency officials of any changes as required under 
Agency parking policies (e.g., new tags, new vehicle).  Employee parking permits must 
be displayed in accordance with Agency parking policies. 

C.  Employees may request and receive a parking space for medical purposes in accordance 
with applicable law, Government-wide rule or regulation, and Agency parking policies. 

SECTION 2.  SHUTTLE SERVICE 
When provided by the Agency, shuttle service will be made available to employees.  
Accommodations will be made for employees with disabilities.  The Agency will monitor the 
shuttle service to ensure safe and courteous operations. 

SECTION 3.  TRANSIT SUBSIDY 

A.  The Parties agree to follow the policies and procedures set forth in FEMA Directive 

254-1, Commuter Transit Subsidy Benefits Program, except as otherwise provided in 
this Agreement.  The Agency will continue to provide public transit subsidies to the 
extent authorized by regulations and based on the availability of funds. 

B.  Based on the availability of funding, employees will be paid a transit subsidy up to their 
eligible commuting costs, not to exceed the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) tax-free 
maximum per month.  Any increases or decreases in the IRS income-tax exclusion for 
transportation benefits during the term of the agreement will be implemented by the 
Agency by the next quarterly allotment of such benefits following the date of the increase 
or decrease, or as soon as funding is made available.  

C.  Employees will follow the applicable procedures established for their official duty station 
location for the transit subsidy, which include completing Public Transportation Benefit 
Program Application, FEMA Form FF 254-1-1. 

D.  Employees who commute to and from work using their personal vehicles are not eligible 
for the public transportation subsidy payment.  In order to be eligible for a transit subsidy, 
employees must only drive their personal vehicles to work on an infrequent basis (e.g., 
when required for a medical appointment).  Obtaining a public transportation subsidy 
payment when ineligible for such a payment may serve as the basis for disciplinary 
action. 

119 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E.  The Agency will publish ridesharing opportunities on the FEMA Intranet. 

120 

 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 40: DUES WITHHOLDING 

SECTION 1.  VOLUNTARY UNION ALLOTMENTS 
In accordance with the Federal Labor Management Relations Statue, the Parties agree that, 
where a Unit employee voluntarily agrees to authorize the payment of union dues through 
payroll deduction, the following provisions will apply. 

SECTION 2.  EMPLOYEE ELIGIBILITY 
To be eligible to make voluntary allotment for the payment of the Union dues, an employee must 
meet all of the following requirements: 

A.  Be a member of the Unit covered by this Agreement; 

B.  Be in good standing with the Union; 

C.  Have a regular net salary, after other legal and required deductions, sufficient to cover the 

amount of the authorized allotment for dues; and 

D.  Not have an allotment already in effect for the payment of Union dues 

SECTION 3.  REVOCATION OF ALLOTMENT 

A.  Request for Revocation.  An employee may submit a request for revocation of an 

allotment at any time, but no revocation will be effected before the one-year period 
provided for in section 7115(a) of the Federal Labor Management Relations Statue has 
been satisfied.  A revocation request form SF-1188 shall be completed by an employee 
and submitted in duplicate to the servicing personnel office. 

Revocation will be made effective as follows: 
1.  Request Made Before One Year 

When revocation is requested before expiration of one year of dues withholding, 
the revocation will be effective on the first day of the first full pay period 
following the one-year anniversary of the date the employee authorized the 
withholding.  The revocation request must be submitted before the start of the first 
full pay period following the one-year anniversary date. 

2.  Request Made After One Year 

When revocation is requested after dues withholding has been in effect for one 
year, then revocation will be effective on the first day of the first full period 
falling on or after December 1st or June 1st.  The revocation request must be 
submitted prior to November 15th or May 15th. 

The Union will be provided a copy of member revocations effected under this section           
within 14 calendar days by the servicing personnel office. 

B.  Termination of Allotments.  All allotments will be terminated if exclusive recognition 
should cease to exist for the covered Unit.  An individual employee’s allotment will be 
terminated when any of the following occur: 

1.  The employee ceases to be a member in good standing of the Union. 

121 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.  The employee is promoted, reassigned, or transferred to a position outside any 

Agency-wide Unit wherein the Union holds exclusive recognition. 

3.  The employee is separated. 

Termination of allotments as required above will be effective on the first full pay period 
following receipt of the appropriate notice by the servicing payroll office.  Terminations 
required because of separation will be effective as of the date of separation.  However, 
when separation occurs during a pay period, the allotment will be withheld from the 
employee’s salary for that pay period. 

SECTION 4.  UNION RESPONSIBILITIES 
It is the responsibility of the Union to: 

A.  Ensure that allotments are voluntary. 

B.  Fully inform members of the truly voluntary nature of the allotments. 

C.  Ensure that its members understand that a revocation must be consistent with Section 3, 

above. 

D.  Secure Form SF-1187, “Request for Payroll Deductions for Labor Organization Dues” 

and make the form available to its members. 

E.  Inform and educate its members on the program for voluntary allotment for labor 

organization dues and the uses and availability of SF-1187. 

F.  Certify by properly authorized Union official, on the SF-1187, the amount of dues to be 

withheld each biweekly pay period. 

G.  Promptly forward completed SF-1187s to the servicing payroll office via OCCHCO. 

H.  Certify to the servicing payroll office via OCCHCO where there is a change in the 

amount of labor organization dues. 

I.  Promptly notify the servicing payroll office via OCCHCO when an employee with an 

allotment ceases to be a member in good standing of the Union. 

J.  Promptly refund any erroneous remittance received, upon notice of discovery of an error. 

SECTION 5.  AGENCY RESPONSIBILITIES 

A.  Completed SF-1187s submitted by the Union to the Agency must be processed in a 
timely manner, within 14 calendar days from receipt of SF-1187 by the Agency. 

B.  Dues will be withheld on a biweekly basis conforming to regular pay period. 

C.  The Agency will, subsequent to each pay period, transmit funds for the aggregate net of 

deductions to the organization or account the Union has identified.  In addition, the Union 

122 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
will be furnished a listing, by name, of all members, which identifies those for whom 
dues have been withheld, any new members, and members for whom no deductions were 
made because of LWOP, insufficient pay, etc.  The Agency will provide the listing in 
alphabetical order on a quarterly basis. 

D.  The Agency will initiate steps to reimburse the Union within 30 calendar days of 

notification from the Union for dues not deducted because of an administrative oversight, 
error, etc., made by the Agency beyond the employee’s or Union’s control.  The Agency 
will provide the Union with updates on the status of the reimbursement and make best 
efforts to ensure payment within 90 days.   

123 

 
 
 
 
ARTICLE 41: DURATION OF AGREEMENT 

SECTION 1.  EFFECTIVE DATE 
This Agreement will be implemented and become effective when it has been signed by the 
parties, after review and approval pursuant to 5 U.S.C. § 7114(c). 

SECTION 2.  DURATION OF AGREEMENT 
This Agreement will remain in full force and effect for a period of three (3) years after its 
effective date.  At the expiration of three (3) years from its effective date, the Agreement will 
automatically renew for one-year periods until the Agency and the Union renegotiate and execute 
a new Agreement. 

SECTION 3.  RENEGOTIATION 

A.  The Agency or the Union may request to renegotiate the Agreement by submitting a 

notice in writing to the other party at least 90 days, but not more than 180 days, prior to 
the expiration date.  Once the Agency or the Union submits a request to renegotiate under 
this Article, the entire Agreement is subject to renegotiation. 

B.  When notice of intent to renegotiate is given, the parties shall meet to negotiate ground 

rules.  This meeting shall occur not later than 30 days prior to the expiration date.   

C.  The ground rules that are negotiated shall be reduced to writing and shall include, at a 
minimum, procedures governing submission of written proposals, scheduling and 
caucuses. 

D.  The notice requirements in this Article do not apply to mid-term negotiations over impact 

and implementation. 

124 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
