U.S. Department of Homeland Security 
Washington, DC  20472 

                                                January 06, 2025 

MEMORANDUM FOR:  Max J. Meindl  

FROM: 

Emergency Management Specialist - CORE  
Region 6 
Recovery Division 

Anthony In 
Supervisory Emergency Management Specialist 
Region 6 
Recovery Division 

SUBJECT: 

Notice of Termination of Appointment 

This memorandum notifies you that your appointment as a Cadre of On-Call/Response/Recovery 
Employee  (CORE),  Emergency  Management  Specialist,  IC-0089-12,  Region  6,  Recovery 
Division, Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), and the Federal service is terminated 
effective January 06, 2025. This action is based on the following charge:  

Charge 1: Inability to Perform (As a result of a Medical Condition) 

Specification 1: The medical evidence shows that you have hypertension, coronary 
artery disease with dyspnea on exertion, angina, arthritis of knees, and unable to function 
well on uneven ground, nor able to walk short distances. Because of these medical 
conditions, you are unable to travel as your position demands.  

BACKGROUND  

In a medical certificate dated December 27, 2023, your physician, C. Christope Gay, MD, stated 
that you have been his patient for 5 years and are being treated for several significant and chronic 
illnesses, to include hypertension and coronary artery disease with dyspnea on exertion. He also 
stated that the significant and chronic illnesses restrict you from being on site and impairs your 
ability to travel from home safely. Additionally, the Medical Inquiry in Response to a Disability 
Accommodation Request completed by C. Christope Gay, MD, PA, provided additional diagnosis 
of angina, arthritis of knees and limitations of chest pain and dyspnea with exertion and unable to 
function well on uneven ground, nor able to walk short distances. 

On January 2, 2024, you submitted a Reasonable Accommodation request for 100% 
remote/virtual telework to the Office of Civil Rights (formally Office of Equal Rights) due to 
you experiencing considerable medical challenges that are impacting your ability to travel to and 
work from a traditional work environment effectively. Your current role as an Emergency 
Management Specialist, Program Delivery Task Force Leader (PD TFL), has not been designed 

www.fema.gov 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for telework. Specifically, your Position Description states that frequent Temporary Duty (TDY) 
travel is required and that “The work is normally performed in an office setting. However, this 
position requires that the incumbent train, maintain a state of readiness, and be deployed into the 
possible high-risk environment of a disaster site. Conditions in some disaster environments may 
include irregular diet or rations; limited rest; uncomfortable sleeping conditions; extensive 
overtime; an environment with unsanitary conditions; and related risks, such as reoccurrence of 
the disaster event (e.g., general hazards, or additional flooding). Travel may be required on short 
notice, during poor conditions. Extreme caution must be exercised to assure personal safety, as 
well as safety of co-workers and members of the public who look to the employee for guidance.”  

On September 5, 2024, the Talent Recruitment & Acquisition Division of the Office of the Chief 
Human Capital Officer initiated a reassignment search process to identify a funded, vacant position 
within  FEMA  and  other  DHS  components.  On  October  30,  2024,  the  Talent  Recruitment  & 
Acquisition Division informed you there were no vacant positions for which you were minimally 
qualified,  and  FEMA  had  exhausted  all  efforts  to  accommodate  you  through  the  reasonable 
accommodation process resulting in the denial of your request. Accordingly, the search concluded. 
On November 26, 2024, you were issued an official denial letter that determined that, based on all 
the information known to the agency after conducting an individualized assessment of the relevant 
circumstances,  to  include  the  essential  functions  of  the  specific  job  and  the  requested 
accommodation(s), that the requested accommodation would require the agency to fundamentally 
change the nature of the position. 

Since  you  cannot  perform  the  essential  functions  of  your  current  position  as  an  Emergency 
Management Specialist with the Recovery Division, Region 6, or any vacant position for which 
you  are  qualified  with  the  Federal  Emergency  Management  Agency  (FEMA),  with  or  without 
reasonable accommodation, you are subject to removal for medical inability. 

While I am concerned about your personal situation, health, and well-being, I have an obligation 
to ensure that the work in this office is completed in a timely and efficient way. The position you 
occupy needs to be filled by an employee who can perform the essential functions of the position 
on a regular, full-time basis. As there is no foreseeable end to your inability to perform the essential 
functions of your position, and to promote the efficiency of the service, it is necessary to move 
forward with your removal. 

Determination 

In determining the appropriate conclusion to impose regarding this matter, the following factors 
were taken into consideration. 

1.  I  considered  that  you  are  incapable  of  performing  the  duties  of  your  position  as  an 
Emergency  Management  Specialist,  IC-0089-12,  due  to  your  documented  medical 
conditions. 

2.  I considered that you signed the Conditions of Employment that states that you “understand 
that I  may  be  assigned to  perform my  disaster-related  duty.  Irrespective  of  my  position 
description, based on the needs of the operational situation, and I must be ready to deploy 

Page 2 of 4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
wherever the Agency needs my services within 24 -48 hours of notification” on October 
31, 2023.  

3.  I do not believe that there are any alternative or lesser actions that would enable you to 
perform your duties, and the decision to remove you from your position is adequate and 
in the best interest of the Agency. 

You must turn in all Government-issued equipment, including but not limited to cellular phones, 
laptop computers, keys, credentials, access or identification cards, Government travel credit/charge 
card (cut credit card in half), and any FEMA office files or back-up (key drives/discs) computer files 
you have in your possession no later than close of business on January 10, 2025. 

Employee Rights 

Because you were appointed to a position under the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and 
Emergency Assistance Act, Public Law 93-288, as amended, your appointment is excluded from 
the provisions of Title V. FEMA is extending to you the opportunity to appeal this decision to 
Supervisory Emergency Management Specialist, Jodi Hunter. If you wish to appeal this decision 
you may do so in writing no later than 5:00 p.m. on the fifth calendar day after you receive this 
notice. Your appeal must be sent to Ms. Hunter through Talease Hughes-Harris, Labor and 
Employee Relations Specialist via email at talease.hughesharris@fema.dhs.gov. Ms. Hunter will 
issue a final decision. 

If you wish to allege this action was the result of prohibited discrimination based on race, color, 
religion,  sex,  national  origin,  disability,  age,  genetic  information,  or  reprisal,  you  may  file  a 
discrimination  complaint  with  the  FEMA  Office  of  Equal  Rights.  To  file  a  complaint  with  the 
FEMA Office of Equal Rights, you must contact a counselor within 45 days of the effective date 
of this action. Your complaint should be sent in writing to:  Office of Equal Rights, 500 C Street 
SW, 4th Floor, Washington, DC, 20472-3505. You can reach a member of the Equal Rights staff 
at (202) 646-3535.  

Federal Benefits 

The Retirement and Benefits branch is available to answer any questions you may have 
concerning retirement and your Federal benefits. Please contact the Retirement and Benefits 
Branch at FEMA-HC-BENEFITS@FEMA.DHS.GOV. 

Employee Assistance Program 

If you would like to talk with an Employee Assistance Program (EAP) Counselor about this matter 
or any personal and/or work-related matter, a counselor can be reached at 1-800-222-0364. You 
do not have to pay a fee to use the service. However, if the counselor refers you outside the program 
and if any costs are incurred, those costs are your responsibility. Consultations with a Counselor 

Page 3 of 4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are strictly confidential- the Counselor cannot release information about you to anyone, without 
your  permission.  This  is  a  voluntary  program  -  meaning  you  cannot  be  ordered  to  contact  a 
Counselor. 

If you have any questions concerning this notice, please contact Talease Hughes Harris, Office of 
the Chief Component Human Capital Officer, Employee Services Division, Labor and Employee 
Relations Branch at talease.hughesharris@fema.dhs.gov or (202) 706-3540. 

cc: 
Talease Hughes-Harris, LER 

Acknowledgement of Receipt 

You are requested to sign and date the acknowledgment copy of this memorandum as evidence 
that you have received it. Your signature does not indicate that you agree or disagree with the 
contents of this memorandum. However, your failure to sign the acknowledgment copy will not 
void the contents of this memorandum. 

____________________________________________ 
Max J. Meindl  

DATE  

_____________________ 

Page 4 of 4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
