DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY
Federal Emergency Management Agency

TELEWORK APPLICATION AND AGREEMENT

1. Check one of the following: 

New Agreement

Change in Existing Agreement

2. Employee Name

3. Organization

4. Position Title

5. Series and Grade

6. Office Telephone No.

7. Supervisor (Name/Title)

8. Type of Telework:

Regular (Core)

Situational (Episodic)

 Part I - Completion of this agreement indicates that: 

1. The employee's telework arrangement begins on

2. The employee's official tour of duty and location (e.g., Home, FEMA HQ) are listed below. NOTE: Employee's official tour of duty must 
include at least a 30-minute uncompensated lunch.

Telework Days 
(Week 1)

Start and End 
Times

Telework Days 
(Week 2)

Start and End 
Times

DAY

Monday

Tuesday

Wednesday

Thursday

Friday

3. Employee volunteers to participate in the program and to adhere to the applicable guidelines and policies. Agency concurs with employee 
participation and agrees to the applicable guidelines and policies.

4. Employee understands that FEMA may require participating employee to work from their telework site, e.g., home, satellite office, or other 
location, during periods of Unscheduled Telework authorization due to area closures, dismissals, unforeseen emergencies or other reasons as 
authorized by the Supervisor.  

5. Management reserves the right to alter the employee's established telework schedule to accommodate peak workload office demands or for 
any other official purpose with advance notifications.

6. Employee's official duty station is:

for purposes such as pay, travel, etc.

7. The address of the employee's alternate worksite is:

City, State

8. Employee's FEMA mobile phone is:

xxx-xxx-xxxx

Number, Street, City, State, Zip Code

9. Employee understands requirements for an adequate and safe office space and that these requirements must be met.

10. An employee approved for telework is required to satisfactorily complete all assigned work, consistent with the approach adopted for all 
other employees in the work group.

11. The employee will regularly meet/speak with the supervisor to receive assignments and to review completed work as necessary or 
appropriate. The employee's job performance will be evaluated on criteria and milestones determined by the supervisor with input form 
employee.

12. Employee's Time and Attendance (WebTA) for all official duty time spent in a Teleworking status will be recorded using the proper 
Telework code. The supervisor and employee are responsible for ensuring the accuracy of time and attendance reported for the employee's 
work at the official duty station and the alternative workplace. The supervisor agrees to certify biweekly the employee's Time and Attendance 
Daily Report for hours worked. The employee's timekeeper will retain a copy of the employee's work schedule. 

13. Employee agrees to participate in surveys and data calls relative to the FEMA Telework Program, as requested. 

14. The employee must obtain supervisory approval before taking leave in accordance with established office procedures in accordance with 
FEMA's Absence and Leave policies.. Use of sick leave, annual leave, or other leave credits during regularly schedule telework time must be 
approved in advance by the supervisor. Overtime must be approved in advance by the supervisor.

15. Employee will utilize Government equipment for official business only and in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, policies, etc., as 
well as safeguard said equipment Employee is responsible for servicing and maintaining employee-owned equipment.

FEMA Form FF-403-FY-21-104 (formerly 123-9-0-1) 
(09/21)

Page 1 of 3

16.  Employee  is  covered  under  the  Federal  Employees  Compensation  Act  in  the  course  of  performing  official  duties  at  the  alternate  work 
location or official duty station. Any accident or injury which occurs at the alternate work location must be brought immediately to the attention 
of the supervisor.

17. Employee understands that telework is not a substitute for dependent care (child care or elder care) and that appropriate arrangements 
must be made to accommodate children and adults who cannot care for themselves, while performing official duties in a telework site.

18.  The  employee  understands  that  the  Government  will  not  be  responsible  for  any  operating  costs  that  are  associated  with  the  use  of 
employee's home as an alternative workplace, for example home maintenance, insurance or utilities.

19. Employee will apply approved safeguards to protect Government records from unauthorized disclosure or damage and will comply with the 
provisions set forth in the Privacy Act of 1974, Public Act of 1974, Public Law 93-579, codified at Title 5, U.S.C., Section 55a.

20. The employee agrees to abide by the Department of Homeland Security and FEMA Standards of Ethical Conduct Standards while working 
on official duty.

21. Telework agreements will be reviewed and discussed between the employee and supervisor on an annual basis. 

22. The employee may withdraw from the program at any time. The supervisor and employee understand that either party may terminate the 
Telework agreement with reasonable advance notice, generally fourteen calendar days, but not less than seven calendar days and require the 
employee to resume working at his/her official duty station. Reasons for termination will be documented by the supervisor and/or employee 
and filed with this agreement. 

Compliance with this Agreement 

The  employee's  failure  to  comply  with  the  terms  of  this  agreement  may  result  in  the  termination  of  this  agreement  and  the  telework 
arrangement. Failure to comply with the provisions of this agreement may also result in appropriate disciplinary or adverse action against the 
employee.

Part II - Certification

By  signing  this  agreement,  the  employee  certifies  that  (s)he  has  read  the  terms  of  this  agreement  and  agrees  to  follow  the  policies  and 
procedures outlined in them as well as all other applicable regulations, policies, and procedures. 

Employee's Signature

Supervisor's Signature

Telework Coordinator's Signature

Title

Title

Title

Date

Date

Date Reviewed

FEMA Form FF-403-FY-21-104 (formerly 123-9-0-1) 
(09/21)

Page 2 of 3

   
Your request to participate in the telework program is: 

Approved as written

Approved with the following modification(s)

Part III - Approval/Disapproval

Disapproved for the following reason(s):

The employee does not have sufficient duties or work activities suitable for performance at an alternate work site.

The employee's absence from the work place under a telework arrangement will unacceptably impact the operation of the work unit.

The extent of supervision required for the employee could not be achieved in conjunction with a telework arrangement.

The employee's alternative work site does not meet prescribed acceptability standards. (State the specific deficiency issue(s), such 
as: safety, two-way communications, access to required materials, IT security, or non-work related distractions and/or obligations.)

The employee is ineligible for telework due to their absence without leave for more than five days in a calendar year. 

The employee is ineligible for telework due to a violation of Subpart G of the Standards of Ethical Conduct of Employees of the 
Executive Branch for viewing, downloading, or exchanging pornography, including child pornography, on a Federal Government 
computer or while performing official Federal Government duties.

Other (please specify in the comments section below):

Supervisor's Signature

Telework Program Coordinator's Signature

FEMA Form FF-403-FY-21-104 (formerly 123-9-0-1) 
(09/21)

Title

Title

Date

Date

Page 3 of 3

