DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY
Federal Emergency Management Agency
REQUEST FOR REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION

 Privacy Act Statement 

Authority: The Privacy Act of 1974 (Privacy Act), 5 U.S.C. § 552a as amended, requires that you provide FEMA with certain information in order to process a 
request. The Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 29 U.S.C. § 701 as amended, stipulates that Federal agencies must provide reasonable accommodation to qualified 
individuals  with  disabilities.  Further,  Executive  Order  13164  mandates  that  Federal  agencies  provide  written  procedures  for  requesting  reasonable 
accommodations and maintain records in order to monitor the procedure's effectiveness.  
Purpose: To provide reasonable accommodations to employees and applicants with disabilities according to Executive Order 13164.  
Routine Uses: The information on this form may be disclosed as generally permitted under 5 U.S.C. § 552a(b) of the Privacy Act of 1974, as amended. This 
includes using this information as necessary and authorized by the routine uses published in DHS/ALL-033 - Reasonable Accommodations Records System of 
Records, 76 Fed. Reg. 41,274 (July 13, 2011) and upon written request, by agreement, or as required by law.  
Disclosure: FEMA's obligation to consider an individual's request for reasonable accommodation begins when the individual makes the request. However, the 
Request  for  Reasonable  Accommodation  form  should  be  filled  out  as  soon  as  possible  following  a  request.  The  disclosure  of  information  on  this  form  is 
voluntary; however, failure to provide the requested information may prevent FEMA from accommodating your request. 

1. Applicant's/Employee's Name

Max J Meindl

3. Organization/Office

DHS/FEMA/PA

2. Telephone Number

2023749426

4. Date of Request

09/20/2021

5. Accommodation Requested (Be as specific as possible, e.g., sign language interpreter, or adaptive equipment such as voice recognition/keyboards, screen 
readers/magnification, etc.):

I respectfully request exemption form the VACCINE MANDATE, and hereby stipulate that I meet the definition of a person having a “disability” under Sec. 
12111(A)(8) of the Act.  I am requesting reasonable accomodation be telework/remote work. I am also requesting a Religious Exemption based on God.

My request for a reasonable accom odation for a permanent exemption from the mandatory vaccine mandate will not result in any un due hardship to the 
agency.   
I am currently employed in a qualified position, and I am able to perform essential job functions. 

6. Reason for Request:

I respectfully request exemption form the VACCINE MANDATE, and hereby stipulate that I meet the definition of a person having a “disability” under Sec. 
12111(A)(8) of the Act.  Furthermore, recent case law arising from the Appeals in Darby v. Childvine Inc. et al; (No. 1:18-cv-0669) concludes that no m andate of a party 
[an employer in this case] can interfere w ith a person’s “normal cell growth” (pg. 6) for people or a class of people protected  by the Act.  The Emergency Use 
experimental gene therapy shots, colloquially and collectively called “Covid V accines,” various parties are requiring you to re ceive are, in fact, designed to alter, impair 
and abrogate “normal cell growth” by virtue of the genetic m odifications made to your body that cause the production of Spike p roteins (sometimes “S-cells”);  and as 
such may not be administered without express consent, whether the injectables or drugs are approved by the FD A or not.  “The FDA noted that Pfizer, “identified 
vaccine-associated enhanced disease, including vaccine-associated enhanced respiratory disease, as an important potential risk”. The EMA similarly acknowledged that 
“vaccine associated enhanced respiratory disease” was “an important potential risk… that may be specific to vaccination for CO VID- 19”. Under current US Federal law 
and by international convention  (N uremberg Codex), no place of business or otherwise, can seek your inoculation com pliance with any drug or injectable, much less any 
of the four available experim ental gene therapy shots that are colloquially and coll ectively referred to as “Covid V accines.”  Such injectables are experimental, not fully 
approved by the FDA or any other authoritative body and m ay not be compulsory as a matter of Federal law in the Emergency Use Authorization statute as more fully 
described in 10 U.S. Code § 1107a.  This subject is also covere d by the Nuremberg Codex, which requires all signatory States to  adopt the tenants in their ow n Statutes, 
as is the case with US Federal law.   In other words, there is no basis for you to subm it to or provide evidence of com pliance with any Covid vaccination m andate 
whatsoever.  PLEASE REFERENCE ATTACHMENTS : "Reasonable Accomodation Request and Max J Meindl ADA Opinion of Counsel" 

7. If accommodation is time sensitive, please explain:

8. Applicant's/Employee's Title

EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT SPECIALIST

9.  Applicant's/Employee's Signature
MAX J MEINDL

Digitally signed by MAX J MEINDL 
Date: 2021.09.20 13:39:02 -05'00'

10. Date

FEMA FORM 256-0-1 (10/14)

Page 1 of 2

Page 1 of 63

  
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE TO REQUEST FOR REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION

11. Request for Reasonable Accommodation (check one):

 Granted

Interim/Alternate Granted (Provide comments in number 16)

 Denied (if denied, answer questions in number 13 )

12. Applicant's/Employee's Name

13. Request for Reasonable Accommodation Denied Because (May check more than one box):

 Accommodation Ineffective

 Accommodation Would Cause Undue Hardship

 Accommodation Would Require Removal of an Essential Function of the job

 Medical Documentation Inadequate

 Accommodation Would Require Lowering of Performance or Production Standard

 Other (Please identify):

14. Detailed reason(s) for the denial of reasonable accommodation (Must be specific, e.g., why accommodation is ineffective or causes undue hardship):

15. If the individual proposed one type of reasonable accommodation which is being denied, but rejected an offer of a different type of reasonable 
accommodation, explain both the reason for the denial of the requested accommodation and why you believe the chosen accommodation would be effective: 

16. Comments

17. If an individual wishes to request reconsideration of this decision, she/he must take the following steps:

An employee may appeal directly to his/her Second Level Supervisor.  The employee may present additional information in support of his/her request.

An applicant may appeal directly to the Disability Employment Program Manager of the Office of Equal Rights.  The applicant may present additional 
information in support of his/her request.

18. If an individual wishes to file an EEO Complaint, or to pursue MSPB or union grievance procedures, she/he must take the following steps:

For an EEO complaint pursuant to 29 C.F.R. 1614, contact an EEO Counselor in the Office of Equal Rights within 45 days from the date of this denial 
of reasonable accommodation; or
For a collective bargaining claim, file a written grievance in accordance with the provisions of the Collective Bargaining Agreement; or 

Initiate an appeal to the Merit Systems Protection Board within 30 days of an appealable adverse action as defined in 5 C.F.R. 1201.3

19. Name Of Deciding Official

20. Signature Of Deciding Official

21. Date

1 Copy of this form must be provided to the employee or applicant who made the request. 
1 Copy of this form must be provided to the Disability Employment Program Manager of the Office of Equal Rights.

FEMA FORM 256-0-1 (10/14)

Page 2 of 2

Page 2 of 63

REQUEST FOR A MEDICAL EXCEPTION TO THE COVID-19 VACCINATION REQUIREMENT 

Government-wide policy requires all Federal employees, as defined in 5 U.S.C. § 2105, to be vaccinated against COVID-19. Under 

the law, employees seeking an exception to the vaccination requirement if they have a medical disability, must complete the form 

below to request a “medical accommodation” or “medical exception.” Submission of the completed form will be treated as a request 

for a disability accommodation and evaluated and decided under applicable Rehabilitation Act standards for reasonable 

accommodation absent undue hardship to the agency. Additional information may be requested if needed to evaluate the request. An 

employee may also request a delay for complying with the vaccination requirement based on certain medical considerations that may 

not justify an exception under the Rehabilitation Act. Safer Federal Workforce Task Force guidance on medical considerations that 

may warrant a delay is available at: https://www.saferfederalworkforce.gov/faq/vaccinations/. The Department will maintain the 

confidentiality of any medical information provided, subject to the applicable Rehabilitation Act standards and the Privacy Act of 

1974. Employees who receive an exception or a delay from the vaccination requirement will be required instead to comply with 

alternative health and safety protocols. 

Signing this form constitutes a declaration that the information you provide is true and correct to the best of your knowledge and 

ability. Any intentional misrepresentation to the Federal Government may result in legal consequences, including termination or 

removal from Federal Service. 

To request a medical exception or delay from the COVID-19 vaccination requirement using this form: 

1.  You must complete Part 1 of this form. 

2.  Your medical provider must complete Part 2 of this form. 

3.  When both are completed, you must submit the form to your designated point of contact at 

https://dhsconnect.dhs.gov/org/offices/crcl/eeo/Pages/Reasonable-Accommodations-at-DHS.aspx/ 

Privacy Act Statement 

Authority: 

DHS is authorized to collect the information requested on this form pursuant to: Sections 501, 503, 504, and 508 of the Rehabilitation 

Act of 1973, as amended; Section 202(d) of the E-Government Act of 2002, Accessibility to Persons with Disabilities; Americans with 

Disabilities Act Amendments Act of 2008; 36 CFR part 1194, Electronic and Information Technology Accessibility Standards; 6 CFR 

part 15, Enforcement of Nondiscrimination on the Basis of Disability in Programs or Activities Conducted by the Department of 

Homeland Security; Executive Order 13164, Establishing Procedures To Facilitate The Provision Of Reasonable Accommodation, 29 

CFR § 1605.2, Reasonable accommodation without undue hardship as required by section 701(j) of title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 

1964; 5 U.S.C. chapters 11 and 79, and in discharging the functions directed under Executive Order 14043, Requiring Coronavirus 

Disease 2019 Vaccination for Federal Employees (Sept. 9, 2021), and 5 U.S.C. chapters 33 and 63 and Executive Order 12196, 

Occupational Safety and Health Program for Federal Employees (Feb. 26, 1980). Additional authorities associated with this collection 

of information can be found in the following system of records notices (SORNs): DHS/ALL-033 Reasonable Accommodations 

Records System of Records, 76 Fed. Reg. 41274 (July 13, 2011); and DHS/ALL-047 Records Related to DHS Personnel, Long-Term 

Trainees, Contractors, Mission Support Individuals, and Visitors During a Declared Public Health Emergency System of Records, 85 

Fed. Reg. 80127 (December 11, 2020)). 

Purpose: 

DHS is requesting this information to track and report the processing of reasonable accommodation requests Department-wide to 

comply with applicable law and regulations, to inform and determine appropriate COVID-19 mitigation measures for particular 

employees, and to preserve and maintain the confidentiality of medical information while promoting the safety of federal workplaces 

and the federal workforce consistent with the above-referenced authorities. 

Routine Uses: 

Disclosure: 

Reasonable Accommodations request data is generally not shared externally. However, a complete list of the routine uses can be 

found in the SORNs identified above associated with this collection of information. The Department’s full list of SORNs can be found 

on the Department’s website at http://www.dhs.gov/system-records-notices-sorns. 

Providing this information to DHS is voluntary. However, failure to provide this information may result in DHS being delayed or 

unable to process a reasonable accommodation request. Unless granted a legally-required exception because of a disability or because 

of a sincerely held religious belief, practice, or observance, all covered federal employees are required to be vaccinated against 

COVID-19 and to provide documentation concerning their vaccination status to their employing agency. Unless you have been 

granted a legally-required exception, failure to provide this information may subject you to disciplinary action, including and up to 

removal from federal service. 

Page 3 of 63

Page 1 

 
 
 
 
 
Part 1 – To Be Completed by the Employee 

Employee Name 

Max J Meindl 

Component 

FEMA 

Position 

PDTFL 

Please describe your job duties 

Division 

PA 

Supervisor 

John Bergin 

Date of Request 

10/27/2021 

Duty Location 

Baton Rouge (ROR) 

Phone Number 

202.705.9463 

Program Delivery Task Force Lead, Debris Task Force, coordinate and mentor assigned PDMG's 

assisting applicants in their recovery efforts for Cat A  Debris projects. 

What is the expected duration of your medical condition? 

Temporary 

Long-term 

Questions 

1.  Briefly describe your disability/medical condition. 

  Shortness of breath, hypertensive urgency, other forms of dyspnea, unilateral primary osteoarthritis, right knee, high blood pressure, hypertensive 

heart disease, lung disorders, supraventricular rapid heart rate, chest pain, angina, abnormal electrocardiogram (ECG), (EKG), atherosclerotic heart 

disease of native coronary artery causing unspecific angina pectoris. Additionally, abnormal results of cardiovascular functional studies. 

2.  Briefly describe the specific accommodation requested 

 Continued Remote/telework, permanent exemption from vaccine mandate. 

3.  Please explain how your disability or medical condition prevents you from receiving the COVID-19 vaccine, 

addressing each type of available (Moderna, Johnson & Johnson, and Pfizer). 

 Due to previous cardiac surgery, hypertensive heart disease causing ongoing cardiac reduction and previously known allergic reactions with a 

history of exposure to contrast media, amlodipine and lisinopril that there is a high degree of probability that he would be allergic to polyethylene 

glycol (PEG) and its components as part of the Covid -19 vaccine. Additionally, there is ongoing data that suggests that Covid- 19 Vaccines can 

damage the cardiovascular system, which is irreparable and irrevocable. Cardiac history of progressive heart disease together with known allergic 

reactions he therefore should not take any substance internally or intravenously that could cause anaphylaxis shock or could be additionally injurious 

to his already compromised cardiac function. PEG’s have a high correlation between allergies and anaphylaxis shock. This is further complicated in 

that due to the vaccines spike protein production that is engineered into the user’s genome, each such recipient of the Covid-19 Vaccines can produce 

micro clots in their cardiovascular system, which considering Mr. Meindl’s cardiac condition, poses a higher risk of complications and injury.  

Additionally, according to the Covid-19 mRNA Vaccine BNT162b2 Manufacturers package leaflet, revised on 09/09/2021, “Covid-19 mRNA 

Vaccine should not be given if you are allergic to the active substance or any of the other ingredients of this medicine” stating that inflammation of 

the heart (myocarditis or pericarditis) have been reported following vaccination. This would certainly apply to Mr. Meindl. 

4.  If permitted an exemption or delay in taking the vaccine, what types of accommodation would enable you to 

perform your job duties without presenting a risk of transmission to others? 

  Continued Remote/telework, as I’ve done for the past 17+ months. 

5.  Have you contacted anyone regarding this request? 

  Previous submitted exemption request, 09/21/2021 

6.  Do you work in a SCIF? 

No 

Medical or Disability Exception Request 

knowledge and ability. 

Employee Signature 

I am requesting a medical exception to the requirement for COVID-19 vaccination or a delay because of a temporary 

condition or medical circumstance. I declare that the information I have provided is true and correct to the best of my 

Page 4 of 63

Page 2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Print Name 

Date 

Part 2 – To be Completed by the Employee's Medical Provider 

Employee Name 

Max J Meindl 

Medical Certification for COVID-19 Vaccine Exemption 

Dear Medical Provider: 

DHS requires its employees to be fully vaccinated against COVID-19 pursuant to Executive Order of the President of the 

United States. The individual named above is seeking a medical exemption to the requirement for COVID-19 vaccination 

or a delay because of a temporary condition or medical circumstance. Please complete this form to assist DHS in its 

reasonable accommodation process. 

Please provide at least the following information, where applicable: 

1.  The applicable contraindication or precaution for COVID-19 vaccination, and for each contraindication or 

precaution, indicate: (a) whether it is recognized by the CDC pursuant to its guidance; and (b) whether it is listed 

in the package insert or Emergency Use Authorization fact sheet for each of the COVID-19 vaccines authorized 

or approved for use in the United States; 

2.  A statement that the individual’s condition and medical circumstances relating to the individual are such 

that COVID-19 vaccination is not considered safe, indicating the specific nature of the medical condition or 

circumstances that contraindicate immunization with a COVID-19 vaccine or might increase the risk for a 

serious adverse reaction; and 

3.  Any other medical condition that would limit the employee from receiving any COVID-19 vaccine. 

Description of the medical condition for which the employee listed above should be exempted from 

complying with a COVID-19 vaccination requirement: 

9/28/2021 

Disability Evaluation for Accommodation Exemption 

Request Regarding: “reasonable disability” accommodation and exemption from, “VACCINE MANDATE” under sec. 12111(A)(8) of the Act: 

Requesting reasonable accommodation to be telework/remote work.  Reference: The Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 29 U.S.C. § 701 as amended, 

stipulates that Federal agencies must provide reasonable accommodation to qualified individuals with disabilities. For: Emergency Management 

Specialist:  Max J. Meindl -DHS/FEMA/PA.  To the disability employment management of equal rights, please find “Sufficient Medical 

Documentation for Accommodation and Exemption from the VACCINE MANDATE”, as follows:  Disability review regarding Mr. Max Meindl who is a 

70-year-old male with CAD, HTN, HLD and severe hypotension following the cardiac surgery of 04/2019. He also has had proximal LAD with 

hematemesis. He has a history of exposure to paint, chemicals and asbestos with additional complications including dizziness since the surgery and 

wheezing. He has ongoing mild cardiac reduction in diffusion capacity. Additionally, he has allergies that include contrast media, amlodipine and 

lisinopril. Mr. Meindl presently carries a 100% total body disability impairment rating as per his prior evaluations and surgeries.  Current Condition:  

Shortness of breath, hypertensive urgency, other forms of dyspnea, unilateral primary osteoarthritis, right knee, high blood pressure, hypertensive 

heart disease, lung disorders, supraventricular rapid heart rate, chest pain, angina, abnormal electrocardiogram (ECG), (EKG), atherosclerotic heart 

disease of native coronary artery causing unspecific angina pectoris. Additionally, he has abnormal results of cardiovascular functional studies. 

Ongoing Active Diagnosis: per Dr. Jneid, Hani, 1) Director, Interventional Cardiology, Department of Medicine -Division of Cardiology, The Michael 

E. DeBakey VAMC, Houston, Texas. 2) Director, Interventional Cardiology Research, Department of Medicine - Division of Cardiology, Baylor College 

of Medicine, Houston, Texas.  Per VA Medical Records: Benign essential hypertension (SCT 1201005)  

HLD - Hyperlipidemia (SCT 55822004), CAD - Coronary artery disease (SCT 53741008), Leukocytosis (SCT 111583006), Adiposis (SCT 414916001)  

Hyperglycemia (SCT 80394007), Leukocytosis (SCT 111583006), Benign essential hypertension (SCT 1201005), Hyperlipidemia (SCT 55822004) 

Coronary arteriosclerosis (SCT 5374100).  Ongoing Medications: Clopidogrel Bisulfate to prevent blood clots, Losartan – for blood pressure, 

Atorvastatin Ca. for Cholesterol, Amlodipine Besylate for blood pressure, Metoprolol succinate for blood pressure, Isosorbidie mononitrate to 

prevent chest pain, Carvedilol for heart support, Tiotropium inhaler, Losartan for blood pressure. Criteria for Sufficient medical documentation 

Accommodation and Exemption for Sections 2 and 3.  Section 2- The major life activity or activities that the impairment limits; physical activity 

restricted from swelling of legs and shortness of breath impacts working in the yard; gardening, walking the dog and sleeping is problematic due 

to breathing issues. Section 3- The extent to which the impairment limits the individual’s ability to perform said activity or activities; moderate to 

severe daily limitations.  Conclusion:  “After reviewing your history, conducting an evaluation and interview, I conclude due to previous cardiac 

surgery, hypertensive heart disease causing ongoing cardiac reduction and previously known allergic reactions with a history of exposure to 

Page 5 of 63

Page 3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 6 of 63

Page 7 of 63

Page 8 of 63

Page 9 of 63

Page 10 of 63

DISABLED RIGHTS ADVOCATES PLLC 

Via PDF 

September 19, 2021 

Max J Meindl 

5 East Austin Street 

Bellville, Texas 77418 

Dear Mr. Meindl: 

Re:  Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 and Covid 19 restrictions, et al 

You have asked me to opine on your rights as a US Citizen under the provisions of the 

Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, codified as 42 U.S.C. § 12101, et seq (hereinafter, 

the “Act”) as it relates to current circumstances resulting from the SARS-Cov-2 (“Covid”) 

declared pandemic.   I believe your questions have arisen largely in relation to your rights 

and obligations in respect of Covid mandates generally, including mandatory Covid 

Vaccinations to participate in daily activities.  

You have represented to me that a qualified medical doctor has diagnosed you with one or 

more medical conditions which meet the criteria detailed in the Act.  It is unnecessary and 

contrary to existing laws to detail your medical issues to others who may rely on this 

opinion, except in very limited cases where issues of suitable work in light of a disability 

requires an employer (if any) to reasonably accommodate your medical needs.  In this 

particular instance, you have expressed concerns over a proposed mandate requiring all 

person to receive either Emergency Use Authorization, Investigational New Drug injectables 

or the newly approved, yet unavailable, Comirnaty brand Pfizer vaccine.   Whatever the 

form of the injectable or vaccination, under these circumstances, the ADA applies.  

You have also expressed concern over a recent Memorandum Opinion rendered by the US 

Department of Justice relating to vaccine mandates under the Emergency Use Authorization 

statute.  Such memorandum is written and providing advice only to the recipient it is 

addressed to and has no bearing whatsoever on your rights under the Act.  For what it is 

worth, said memorandum is fatally flawed in its narrow analysis and fails to address 

existing Supreme Court Case law as detailed in the Jacobsen v. Massachusetts (1905) case; 

which gave rise to the statutory protections against medical experimentation on the public.  

In other words, the memorandum has no relevance whatsoever to the conclusions and 

opinion expressed herein.   

Based on your representations concerning your disability and nature of your concerns, I 

confirm that you meet the definition of a person having a “disability” under Sec. 

12111(A)(8) of the Act.  Furthermore, recent case law arising from the 6th Circuit Court of 

Appeals in Darby v. Childvine Inc. et al; (No. 1:18-cv-0669) concludes that no mandate of a 

party [an employer in this case] can interfere with a person’s “normal cell growth” (pg. 6) 

for people or a class of people protected by the Act.      

600 17th Street, Suite 2800 South 

Denver, CO 80202 

Phone: (303) 228-7065 

Page 11 of 63

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DISABLED RIGHTS ADVOCATES PLLC 

The Emergency Use experimental gene therapy shots, colloquially and collectively called 

“Covid Vaccines,” various parties are requiring you to receive are, in fact, designed to alter, 

impair and abrogate “normal cell growth” by virtue of the genetic modifications made to 

your body that cause the production of Spike proteins (sometimes “S-cells”);1 and as such 

may not be administered without express consent, whether the injectables or drugs are 

approved by the FDA or not. 

Broadly, the Act describes rights of disabled persons (the “Disabled”) and obligations of 

persons (legal and natural) interacting with the Disabled under Federal law, which is often 

further clarified under various States’ laws.   

One such right of the Disabled (such as yourself), provides for certain medical privacy 

protections that may be additionally regulated in companion statutes such as The Health 

Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (“HIPAA”).   The HIPPA statute, inter alia, 

protects your right for non-disclose of the nature and extent of your medical issues and 

disabilities to third parties. 

Once the ADA protections and rights are asserted, all persons, including third-parties and 

entities conceived or covered by the Act must provide you with “reasonable 

accommodation” under Section under Sec. 12111 (9) & (10) ibid.  The covered entities 

include effectively all enterprises, schools or offices open to the public or where sufficient 

elements of interstate commerce are present.  This includes all offices of local, state or 

federal governmental bodies, including but not limited to: detention facilities; government-

funded health care facilities; regulatory offices open to the public; Law Enforcement 

facilities; and legislative areas where the public would reasonably be anticipated to 

occasion or occupy.  Likewise, private enterprises such as hospitals, hotels, restaurants, 

shops and airlines must provide such Reasonable Accommodation to you and your 

circumstances as a “disabled person” under the Act. 

In particular, you have suggested the mask mandates cause you medical hardship from the 

reduced access to and flow of oxygen available to you.   Such accommodation certainly 

includes your ability to breathe freely without impairment, which could or would be caused 

by mandatory mask or filter apparatus wearing, as mandated by private businesses or 

public offices that you have occasion to visit.  Such accommodations are recognized by the 

Act and are referred to as “Public Accommodations” under Title III of the Act.   Failure to 

provide such accommodation may give rise, inter alia, to significant penalties (see:  Title III 

supra.) and provide the basis for damage awards. 

Likewise, you have mentioned that protocols and methodologies relating to the taking of 

DNA samples for the “Covid 19”Polymerase Chain Reaction (“PCR”) test are painful, 

intrusive and exacerbate existing medical conditions.   Recently, the PCR tests were recalled 

and were never intended for diagnostic purposes to begin with.   Certainly DNA material for 

1 

4842/Pfizer.pdf 

https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/101

600 17th Street, Suite 2800 South 

Denver, CO 80202 

Phone: (303) 228-7065 

Page 12 of 63

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
DISABLED RIGHTS ADVOCATES PLLC 

the tests need not come from your nasal passages alone; therefore you have no reason to 

undertake such a test as traditionally applied.  Clearly there are other ways to accommodate 

your needs. 

In providing the opinions in this letter, I have relied, with your authorization, as to factual 

matters that affect my opinion, solely upon your verbal and/or written representations and 

I have made no independent investigation of the facts contained therein.   

To the extent that my opinion herein is based on the existence or absence of facts, it is 

intended to signify that during the course of my representation of you, no information has 

come to the attention of me (Todd S. Callender, Esq.), being the only attorney of this firm 

who has had participation in such representation of you, that would give me actual 

knowledge of the existence or absence of such facts, and that neither I nor this firm has 

undertaken any independent investigation to determine the existence or absence of such 

facts, and no inference as to my or this firm’s knowledge of the existence or absence of such 

facts should be drawn from such representation of you. 

Opinions 

1. 

It should go without saying that under current US Federal law and by 

international convention  (Nuremberg Codex), no place of business or otherwise, can seek 

your inoculation compliance with any drug or injectable, much less any of the four available 

experimental gene therapy shots that are colloquially and collectively referred to as “Covid 

Vaccines.”  Such injectables are experimental, not fully approved by the FDA or any other 

authoritative body and may not be compulsory as a matter of Federal law in the Emergency 

Use Authorization statute as more fully described in 10 U.S. Code § 1107a.  This subject is 

also covered by the Nuremberg Codex, which requires all signatory States to adopt the 

tenants in their own Statutes, as is the case with US Federal law.   In other words, there is no 

basis for you to submit to or provide evidence of compliance with any Covid vaccination 

mandate whatsoever. 

2. 

As such, it is my opinion that your rights emanating from the Act and 

pursuant to other applicable current US Federal and State law, exempts you from any 

experimental vaccination requirement; and it is impermissible for any employer or other 

covered entity to question or condition your service or treatment of any kind upon such a 

vaccination.  It is the obligation of the businesses, hospitals, employers and offices described 

in the Act to accommodate you; it is not your obligation to amend or ignore you medical 

needs to accommodate others in the public area or in the performance of your duties under 

any employment contract, even where you are contracted for you services. 

3. 

Failure to accommodate you and your needs may create the jurisdictional 

basis for tort claims and personal injury damages.  In certain cases non-observance of the 

Act may give rise to a State’s Attorney General bringing suit, which can include injunctive 

relief and monetary penalties. 

General Exceptions and Qualifications 

600 17th Street, Suite 2800 South 

Denver, CO 80202 

Phone: (303) 228-7065 

Page 13 of 63

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 14 of 63

 DISABLED RIGHTS ADVOCATES PLLC     600 17th Street, Suite 2800 South Denver, CO 80202 Phone: (303) 228-7065 My opinions set forth above are subject to the following exceptions and qualifications: 1. the only opinions expressed herein are those expressly set forth in paragraphs 1 through 3 immediately above and no other opinions may be implied or inferred from such opinions; 2. I do not express any opinion concerning any laws other than the Federal laws of the United States of America; and 3. I disclaim any obligation to update any of the opinions expressed herein for events, facts or circumstances occurring after the date hereof. This opinion letter is based solely upon the applicable Federal laws of the United States of America in effect on the date of this opinion letter and is furnished to you solely for your benefit.  This opinion letter may not be distributed to or relied upon by any other person without my prior written consent.  I do not opine on, nor does this opinion letter cover, any laws of the individual States within the United States of America.  If you are a resident of the State of Colorado and would like a Colorado-specific legal opinion, please contact me.      Sincerely,    Todd S. Callender, Esq. Colo. Atty. Reg. #25981      MAX J MEINDL  

REASONABLE ACCOMODATION 

EXEMPTION FROM MANDATED VACCINATION 

I Want to keep my job. 

I respectfully demand exemption from the VACCINE MANDATE, and hereby stipulate that I meet the 

definition of a person having a “disability” under Sec. 12111(A)(8) of the Act and that I have sincerely held religious 
beliefs.  To the best of my recollection, I have not received any vaccinations since 12/1969, while in the Navy or 
approximately 51 years and 10 months ago.  From DHS Reasonable Accommodation Policy: “Qualified Individual 
with a Disability.  An individual with a disability who satisfies the requisite skill, experience, education, and other 
job-related requirements of the employment position such individual holds or desires, and who, with or without 
reasonable accommodation, can perform the essential functions of such position.” 

Furthermore, recent case law arising from the Appeals in Darby v. Childvine Inc. et al; (No. 1:18-cv-0669) 

concludes that no mandate of a party [an employer in this case] can interfere with a person’s “normal cell growth” 
(pg. 6) for people or a class of people protected by the Act.   

The Emergency Use experimental gene therapy shots, colloquially and collectively called “Covid Vaccines,” 
various parties are requiring me to receive are, in fact, designed to alter, impair and abrogate “normal cell growth” 
by virtue of the genetic modifications made to your body that cause the production of Spike proteins (sometimes 
“S-cells”);  and as such may not be administered without express consent, whether the injectables or drugs are 
approved by the FDA or not.   

The FDA noted that Pfizer, “identified vaccine-associated enhanced disease, including vaccine-associated 

enhanced respiratory disease, as an important potential risk”. The EMA similarly acknowledged that “vaccine 
associated enhanced respiratory disease” was “an important potential risk… that may be specific to vaccination for 
COVID- 19”.  

Under current US Federal law and by international convention (Nuremberg Codex), no place of business 

or otherwise, can seek your inoculation compliance with any drug or injectable, much less any of the four available 
experimental gene therapy shots that are colloquially and collectively referred to as “Covid Vaccines.”   

Such injectables are experimental, not fully approved by the FDA or any other authoritative body and may 

not be compulsory as a matter of Federal law in the Emergency Use Authorization statute as more fully described 
in 10 U.S. Code § 1107a.   

The Emergency Use Authorization Statute Prohibits Mandating the Currently Available COVID-19 Vaccines 

The United States Code provides: [S]ubject to the provisions of this section, the Secretary (of the 
Department of Health and Human Services) may authorize the introduction into interstate commerce, during the 
effective period of a declaration under subsection (b), of a drug, device, or biological product intended for use in 
an actual or potential emergency (referred to in this section as an “emergency use.” 

21 U.S.C. § 360bbb-3(a)(1) (emphasis added) [hereinafter EUA Statute]. As an essential part of the explicit 

statutory conditions for EUA, the EUA Statute mandates that all individuals to whom the EUA product may be 
administered be given the option to accept or refuse administration of the product. See 21 U.S.C. § 360bbb-
3(e)(1)(A)(ii)(III) (requiring that “individual to whom the product is administered are informed . . . of the option to 
accept or refuse administration of the product” (emphasis added)). The only currently available COVID-19 vaccines 

Page 15 of 63

 
(Janssen/Johnson & Johnson, Moderna, and Pfizer-BioNTech) are only authorized for use under the EUA Statute 
and have no general approval under federal law. Thus, the administration of such vaccines cannot be mandatory 
under the plain text of the EUA Statute. 

The statutorily required Fact Sheets for each of the EUA COVID-19 vaccines acknowledge that 

individuals cannot be compelled to accept or receive the vaccine. See: 

1.  Moderna, Fact Sheet for Recipients and Caregivers (June 24, 2021), 

https://www.fda.gov/media/144638/download (“It is your choice to receive or not to receive the 
Moderna COVID-19 Vaccine. Should you decide not to receive it, it will not change your standard 
medical care.” (emphasis added));  

2.  Pfizer-BioNTech, Fact Sheet for Recipients and Caregivers (June 25, 2021), 

3. 

https://www.fda.gov/media/144414/download (“It is your choice to receive or not to receive the 
Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 Vaccine. Should you decide not to receive it, it will not change your 
standard medical care.” (emphasis added));  
Janssen, Fact Sheet for Recipients and Caregivers (July 8, 2021), 
https://www.fda.gov/media/146305/download (“It is your choice to receive or not to receive the 
Janssen COVID-19 Vaccine. Should you decide not to receive it, it will not change your standard 
medical care.” (emphasis added)). 

This subject is also covered by the Nuremberg Codex, which requires all signatory States to adopt the 

tenants in their own Statutes, as is the case with US Federal law.   In other words, there is no basis for any 
requirement for me to submit to or provide evidence of compliance with any Covid vaccination mandate 
whatsoever. 

I ALSO have a strong moral and sincere religious beliefs and objection to vaccines that were derived 

from aborted fetal cells. 

It is my sincerely held religious belief that, in being vaccinated with any of the currently available alleged 

COVID-19 vaccines, I would be cooperating with and complicit in abortion – the ending of an innocent human life – 
and that such would constitute a sin against God and a violation of His Commandments, for which I would be held 
morally accountable by God.  

 For that reason, I am demanding a medical and a religious accommodation, under Title VII and any 

similar Texas and or Washington DC state (district) law(s), that will excuse me from having to receive a COVID-19 
vaccine, and further request that no adverse employment action be taken against me on account of my religious 
beliefs. 

A. 
information is enumerated by the Lozier Institute [2]. This information is recorded by the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory [3]. 

Pfizer and BioNTech – The Pfizer Vaccine was protein tested using the abortion-derived cell line HEK-293. This 

Moderna – The Moderna Vaccine was protein tested using the abortion-derived cell line HEK-293. This information is 

B. 
enumerated by the Lozier Institute [2]. This information is cited by the vaccine researchers Kizzmekia S. Corbett, Darin K. 
Edwards, and Sarah R. Leist [4]. 

C. 
Janssen website [5]. This information is enumerated by the Lozier Institute [2].  

Johnson & Johnson – The J&J Vaccine has publicly admitted to using a cell line called PER.C6. This is published on the 

D. 

Sputnik V – The Sputnik V Vaccine cites their manufacturers as using the abortion-derived cell line HEK-293 [6][7]. 

AstraZeneca – AstraZeneca was developed using the abortion-derived cell line HEK-293. This information is 

E. 
enumerated by the Lozier Institute [2]. This information is also contained in documents permitting its emergency use in the 
United Kingdom [8]. 

Page 16 of 63

F. 
Lozier Institute [2]. This information is recorded by the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory [9].  

Vaxart – Vaxart was produced with the abortion-derived cell line HEK-293. This information is enumerated by the 

Altimmune – The Altimmune vaccine was produced and developed with the abortion-derived cell line PER.C6. This 

G. 
information is recorded by Altimmune’s own Clinical Trial Protocol [10]. This information is enumerated by the Lozier Institute 
[2]. 

H. 
information is enumerated by the Lozier Institute [2]. This information is recorded by the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory [11].  

COVAXX and United Biomedical – COVAXX was protein tested using the abortion-derived cell line HEK-293. This 

I. 
enumerated by the Lozier Institute [2]. This information is recorded by the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory [12]. 

Medicago – The Medicago Vaccine was protein tested using the abortion-derived cell line HEK-293. This information is 

J. 
enumerated by the Lozier Institute [2]. This information is recorded by researches at ScienceMag [13]. 

Novavax – The Novavax Vaccine was protein tested using the abortion-derived cell line HEK-293. This information is 

K. 
information is enumerated by the Lozier Institute [2]. This information is recorded by EBioMedicine at the Lancet [14].  

University of Pittsburgh “PittCoVacc” – PittCoVacc was produced with the abortion-derived cell line HEK-293. This 

Walter Reed Army Institute – The Walter Reed Vaccine was produced with the abortion-derived cell line HEK-293. 
L. 
This information is enumerated by the Lozier Institute [2]. This information is recorded by the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory 
[15]. 

Sanofi Pasteur and Translate Bio – The Sanofi Vaccine was developed and protein tested using the abortion-derived 

M. 
cell line HEK-293. This information is enumerated by the Lozier Institute [2]. This information is recorded by the vaccine 
researchers at NPJ Vaccines [16]. 

N. 
information is enumerated by the Lozier Institute [2]. This information is recorded by researches at ScienceMag [17]. 

Inovio Pharmeceuticals – The Inovio Vaccine was protein tested using the abortion-derived cell line HEK-293. This 

O. 
Arcturus Therapeutics – The Arcturus Vaccine was protein tested using the abortion-derived cell line HEK-293. This 
information is enumerated by the Lozier Institute [2]. This information is recorded by the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory [18]. 

Imperial College London – The Imperial College Vaccine was developed and protein tested using the abortion-derived 

P. 
cell line HEK-293. This information is enumerated by the Lozier Institute [2]. This information is recorded by the Cold Spring 
Harbor Laboratory [19]. 

Q. 
Providence Therapeutics – The Providence Vaccine was developed and protein tested using the abortion-derived cell 
line HEK-293. This information is enumerated by the Lozier Institute [2]. This information is recorded by the Cold Spring Harbor 
Laboratory [20]. 

R. 
enumerated by the Lozier Institute [2]. This information is recorded by researches at ScienceMag [21]. 

CoronaVac – CoronoVac was protein tested using the abortion-derived cell line HEK-293. This information is 

S. 
information is enumerated by the Lozier Institute [2]. This information is recorded by researches at BioSpace [22]. 

CanSino Biologics – The CanSino Vaccine was protein tested using the abortion-derived cell line HEK-293. This 

ImmunityBio and NantKwest – The ImmunityBio Vaccine was developed, produced, and protein tested using the 

T. 
abortion-derived cell line HEK-293. This information is enumerated by the Lozier Institute [2]. This information is recorded by 
the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory [23]. 

Institut Pasteur and Themis and Merck – The Institut Pasteur Vaccine was developed and protein tested using the 

U. 
abortion-derived cell line HEK-293. This information is enumerated by the Lozier Institute [2]. This information is recorded by 
the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America [24]. 

V. 
information is enumerated by the Lozier Institute [2]. This information is recorded by the Global Virus Network [25]. 

Rega Institute, KU Leuven – The Rega Vaccine protein tested using the abortion-derived cell line HEK-293. This 

W. 
293. This information is enumerated by the Lozier Institute [2]. This information is recorded by the Cell Press Journal [26]. 

Anhui Zhifei – The Anhui Zhifei Vaccine was developed and protein tested using the abortion-derived cell line HEK-

Page 17 of 63

X. 
information is enumerated by the Lozier Institute [2]. This information is recorded by the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory [27]. 

Clover Biopharmeceuticals – The Clover Vaccine was protein tested using the abortion-derived cell line HEK-293. This 

I respectfully request that DHS/FEMA provide alternative early treatment and preventative options to 

employees by making available the following proactive preventative measures, at no cost to employees: HCQ 200 
mg tabs #16 (HCQ = hydroxychloroquine), Zinc sulfate 22O mg (or elemental Zinc 50 mg) # 15, Azithromycin 500 mg # 
5 (or Z pack) or Doxycycline 100 mg # 10), Ivermectin 3 mg tabs #8, Aspirin 325 mg tabs #30, Day 1 - HCQ 2 tabs twice 
a day, Zinc sulfate tab twice a day, (Azithromycin tab one per day or doxycycline cap twice a day), Ivermectin 12 mg 
on day 1 only, Aspirin 325 mg, Days 2-5: HCQ tab 3 times a day, Zinc sulfate 3 times a day, (Azithromycin tab daily or 

Page 18 of 63

 
 
 
 
 
doxycycline cap twice a day), Aspirin 325 mg daily, Ivermectin 12 mg on day 3 if symptoms warrant, Prednisone 60 
mg daily x 5-7 days or Dexamethasone 4 mg bid if wheezing /SOB, Budesonide 0.5-1mg/2ml vía nebulizer bid, Vitamin 
D3 5000 iu daily, Pepcid 20 mg daily, Continue daily Aspirin 325 mg, Over the counter prevention: Elemental Zinc 25 
mg once a day, Vitamin D 4000 iu once a day, Vitamin C 1000 mg once a day, Quercetin 500 mg once a day, If 
Quercetin is unavailable, then use Epigallocatechin-gallate (EGCG) 400mg once a day. 

•  Role of ivermectin in the prevention of SARS-CoV-2 infection among healthcare workers in India: 

A matched case-control study 1, 2 
Ivermectin, ‘Wonder drug’ from Japan: the human use perspective 3 
“Now is the time to use ivermectin” 4 

• 

• 

1.  COVID-19 vaccines currently available, are mRNA vaccines.[3]  

1.  What is an mRNA vaccine?[4] 
2.  According to the CDC, contain “mRNA vaccines have strands of genetic material called mRNA 

inside a special coating. That coating protects the mRNA from enzymes in the body that would 
otherwise break it down. It also helps the mRNA enter the dendritic cells and macrophages in the 
lymph node near the vaccination site.” https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/covid-19/hcp/mrna-
vaccine-basics.html 

3.  The Janssen Biotech, Inc, slightly different in using the viral vector to shuttle gene encoding, 

delivers ‘S Antigen DNA’… “The viral vector shuttles the gene encoding the S antigen into a 
human cell.”[5] 

4.  And “the Oxford-AstraZeneca vaccine is based on the virus’s genetic instructions for building the 
spike protein. But unlike the Pfizer-BioNTech and Moderna vaccines, which store the instructions 
in single-stranded RNA, the Oxford vaccine uses double-stranded DNA.”[6] 

2.  All COVID-19 Vaccines are currently only approved as Emergency USE Authorizations (EUAs).  

1.  What is an Emergency Use Authorization? “Under an EUA, FDA may allow the use of unapproved 

medical products, or unapproved uses of approved medical products in an emergency to 
diagnose, treat, or prevent serious or life-threatening diseases or conditions when certain 
statutory criteria have been met, including that there are no adequate, approved, and available 
alternatives.”[7] 

3. 

It has been made clear that not only is there a first for mRNA technology – there is also a first for the Lipid 
Nanoparticles used to transport the mRNA technology:” The vaccines, appropriately celebrated as a first 
for mRNA technology, are also a milestone for the nanoparticle field…” — meaning this is an unknown 
experiment. The article explains that historically this research has not been successful. And this first in 
science, which is a true experiment, is also one that is not transparent: “But details on how Moderna 
arrived at its optimal formulation in the first place are scant. Id.[8]. 

There are No Long-Term Studies supporting Safety and Efficacy of EUA COVID-19 vaccines. 

1.  Long-term side effects, severe or minor, are unknown because there are no PRIOR approved mRNA 

2. 

vaccines in the U.S. 
In 2020 the University of Pennsylvania did a mRNA Review, which can be summed up with this excerpt 
from the Review, that addresses the lack of sufficient data on mRNA vaccines in 2020, supporting the fact 
that all of the reliable data for both short-term and long-term trends will be based on the population who 

1 https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33592050/   
2 https://principia-scientific.com/india-is-now-covid-19-free-by-using-ivermectin/  
3 https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3043740/  
4 https://principia-scientific.com/now-is-the-time-to-use-ivermectin/ 

Page 19 of 63

 
 
is now getting the COVID-19 vaccines[9]. This is the largest known experiment on Americans. While there 
is not sufficient data to statistically test these observations, a few trends are seen in the data.  First, the 
rate of adverse events and the rate of serious adverse events were higher after a subject’s second injection 
compared to the first one.  Second, subjects receiving higher doses of the vaccine reported more adverse 
events and more severe adverse events.  There is a possible trend towards a reduced rate of adverse 
events in older subjects than in younger ones.  There is not sufficient data to permit any conclusions 
about the comparative safety of specific vaccines.  While one study reported on mRNA influenza vaccines 
and another reported on a respiratory syncytial virus vaccine, there is not sufficient evidence to draw more 
generalized comparisons of the safety of mRNA vaccines compared to other types of vaccines. 

My DEMAND FOR EXEMPTION FROM MANDATED VACCINATION AND MY Option to Refuse is based on 

Federal law over EUAs[10].   

No one has the right to mandate an EUA approved vaccine. 

1.  My Right to Informed Consent[11] is separate from the Option to Refuse and is also based on Federal law 

over EUAs. 

2.  The most recent relevant court decision in relation to an injunction application on an Emergency 

Authorized Vaccine (EUA) vaccine was Doe v. Rumsfeld, Civil Action No. 03-707, 2005 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 5573, 
*2-3, 2005 WL 1124589, where the United States District Court for the District of Columbia required that 
the EUA anthrax vaccine be only administered in the military on a voluntary basis “pursuant to the terms 
of a lawful emergency use authorization (“EUA”) pursuant to section 564 of the Federal Food, Drug, and 
Cosmetic Act.”  This decision, as the earlier decision in Doe v. Rumsfeld, 297 F. Supp. 2d 119 also found 
the EUA could not be mandated; recognizing the option to refuse under federal law governing EUAs. 
3.  To be clear, the EEOC’s guidance updated on May 28, 2021, related to language suggesting that vaccines 
may be “required” by employers, only states that “federal EEO laws do not prevent an employer from 
requiring all employees physically entering the workplace to be vaccinated…”[12] This is called a word 
game or word salad. 

4.  This is a limited statement which does not include other federal law, specifically 21 USCS § 360bbb-3 

under the Food Drug and Safety Act, discussed above, which requires that EUA’s are administered with 
the option to refuse and the right to informed consent, which requires both the benefits and the 
negatives of an EUA vaccine. 

5.  EEOC guidance relates to Title VII and discrimination laws, which for example does not relate to other 

potential lawsuits, such as under the ERISA statute at 29 U.S.C. 1132(a)(1(b) for arbitrary and capricious 
health plans mandating vaccines. Deciding that you choose a COVID-19 vaccine is a medical question to 
made with your doctor — not because of a mandate from an employer. 

6.  EEOC guidance recognizes that you may have a religious or medical exemption. Religious exemption, for 

example, can apply to those who oppose abortion based on their faith because the Johnson & Johnson 
vaccine, (the Jansen vaccine), uses retinal cells from a fetus that was aborted in 1985 and treated in a lab 
since; the Pfizer and Moderna vaccines test the mRNAs on fetal cell lines from an aborted fetus from 
1973[13]. 

7.  There is Potential Liability on Employers that Mandate Vaccines if an Employee suffers any Side Effects or 

Death from a mandatory EUA vaccine.  

1. 

2. 

It is a violation of my privacy rights to be forced to declare whether I have been vaccinated or 
not.  When a Virtue Hunter seeks this information, I am reminding you of my privacy rights of my 
own medical information, also known as PHI and PII[14] 
I am asking about all updates on safety because I have the right to informed consent. For 
example, the CDC has recently put out information in April of 2021on reports of Myocarditis 
following mRNA vaccines.[15]   On June 23, 2021 the CDC updated guidance recognizing that 
“Since April 2021, there have been more than a thousand reports to the Vaccine Adverse Event 
Reporting System (VAERS) of cases of inflammation of the heart—called myocarditis and 
pericarditis—happening after mRNA COVID-19 vaccination (i.e., Pfizer-BioNTech, Moderna) in 

Page 20 of 63

the United States.”  https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-
ncov/vaccines/safety/myocarditis.html. 

3.  Despite this, the CDC recommends vaccination? This is a serious condition and the question of 
whether the vaccine is appropriate for me, should be a discussion with my doctor, not my 
employer. 

4.  Safety and Efficacy is based on a Cost Benefit analysis, but at the peak, March 16, 2020, CFR 
(Case Fatality Ratio) was highest in people aged 85 years or older (range 10%–27%), and was 
lower in people younger than 55 years (<1%).[16a] 

5.  Luc Montagnier, a French virologist and recipient of the 2008 Nobel Prize in Medicine for his 

discovery of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), has recently exposed the dangers of the 
COVID-19 vaccines. Montagnier discussed the issue in an interview with Pierre Barnérias of Hold-
Up Media earlier this month, which was exclusively translated from French into English for RAIR 
Foundation USA. The vaccines don’t stop the virus, argues the prominent virologist, they do the 
opposite – they “feed the virus,” and facilitate its development into stronger and more 
transmittable variants. These new virus variants will be more resistant to vaccination and may 
cause more health implications than their “original” versions.[16b] 

6.  On April 20, 2021 OSHA issued guidance that says, “If you require your employees to be 

vaccinated as a condition of employment (i.e., for work-related reasons), then any adverse 
reaction to the COVID-19 vaccine is work-related. The adverse reaction is recordable if it is a new 
case under 29 CFR 1904.6 and meets one or more of the general recording criteria in 29 CFR 
1904.7.” 

7.  More recently, however, due to Administration virtue signaling, the language from OSHA appears 
to have been updated to state: Are adverse reactions to the COVID-19 vaccine recordable on the 
OSHA recordkeeping log? DOL and OSHA, as well as other federal agencies, are working diligently 
to encourage COVID-19 vaccinations. OSHA does not wish to have any appearance of 
discouraging workers from receiving COVID-19 vaccination, and also does not wish to 
disincentivize employers’ vaccination efforts. As a result, OSHA will not enforce 29 CFR 1904’s 
recording requirements to require any employers to record worker side effects from COVID-19 
vaccination through May 2022. We will reevaluate the agency’s position at that time to 
determine the best course of action moving forward. 

8.  Are they arbitrarily changing the law – to fit virtue signaling…? The question would then become, 
can an agency change enforcement of a regulation without following the APA and putting out 
notice of a rule change? 

9.  Does my employer want to find out what the lack of informed consent from a mandate making 

available the option to refuse or the mandated disclosure of private health information means in 
civil litigation? Or when there is injury after mandating a EUA vaccine, or in worker’s 
compensation court depending on the coverage? 

8.  Preliminary Research from the National Institutes of Health shows Immunity for those of who have had 

COVID-19.  

1.  No studies yet exist on the long-term impact on someone getting an EUA COVID-19 Vaccine who 

has had COVID-19. And there are reports of people with serious adverse reactions.[17] 
2.  CDC appears to ignore research such as the NIH study in early 2021[18] ,[19] which is based on 
more recent research than the authorizations that the EUA approvals were based on for the 
current EUAs, when the CDC issued its guidance on recommended vaccinations. Preliminary 
Research shows those who have had Covid-19 do have T-cells that protect them from 
reinfection, which is greater than the six months some were led to believe. Despite this, the CDC 
recommends vaccination “Even if you have already recovered from COVID-19, it is possible-
although rare-that you could be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19 again…”[20]And it 
appears the CDC is ignoring its own medical definition of immunity:  “Immunity: Protection from 
an infectious disease. If you are immune to a disease, you can be exposed to it without becoming 
infected.”[21] – which obviously indicates that you are immune when you have already been 
infected. There are no long-term studies on what adverse events can happen to someone who 
already had COVID-19 and gets the vaccine. 

Page 21 of 63

3.  Children under 16 show 0 risk of infection or getting symptomatic from COVID-19.[22] In 

Abdullahi v. Pfizer, Inc., 562 F.3d 163, 188-189, (2nd Cir. 2009), the court, under the Alien Tort 
Statute, protected Nigerian children from an experimental vaccine that Pfizer was using on them 
without Informed Consent. 

4.  And this is without getting to the question of currently available treatment options for COVID-19 
and whether there is still an Emergency basis to authorize EUAs like the COVID-19 Vaccines. 
Hydroxychloroquine Has about 90 Percent Chance of Helping COVID-19 Patients, States 
Association of American Physicians and Surgeons (AAPS), April 28, 2020[23]. 

5.  “The Association of American Physicians and Surgeons (AAPS) presents a frequently updated 

table of studies that report results of treating COVID-19 with the anti-malaria drugs chloroquine 
(CQ) and hydroxychloroquine (HCQ, Plaquenil®).”[24] 

6.  “A five-day course of ivermectin for the treatment of COVID-19 may reduce the duration of 

illness,” by the National Library of Medicine, pub.med.gov,[25] 

7.  The FDA reached a milestone of approving 1,000 original and supplemental generic drug 

applications to help in the treatment of patients with COVID-19 since the start of the pandemic. 
The Center for Drug Evaluation and Research prioritized the review of generic drug applications 
for potential treatments and supportive therapies for patients with COVID-19, such as antibiotics, 
sedatives used in ventilated patients, anticoagulants, and pulmonary medications.[26] 

[1] “There are currently no licensed mRNA vaccines in the United States.” 
https://www.covidhealth.com/article/understanding-explaining-mrna-covid19-vaccines 

REFERENCES 

 [2] The most updated list of licensed vaccines in the U.S. is at FDA.gov.  https://www.fda.gov/vaccines-blood-
biologics/vaccines/vaccines-licensed-use-united-states 

[3] Moderna “The vaccine contains a nucleoside-modified messenger RNA encoding the viral spike (S) glycoprotein 
of SARS-CoV-2 formulated in lipid particles.  It is an investigational vaccine not licensed for any indication.”    See 
FDA letter 2/25/01 to Moderna granting “Emergency Use Authorization (EUA)”.    

Pfizer Bio-NTech Covid-19 vaccine:  “The vaccine contains a nucleocide-modified messenger RNA (modRNA) 
encoding the viral spike (S) glycoprotein of SARS-CoV-2 formulated in lipid particles.  It is an investigational vaccine 
not licensed for any indication.”    See FDA letter 2/25/01 to Pfizer Bio-NTech granting “Emergency Use 
Authorization (EUA).” 

[4] mRNA Vaccines Are New, But Not Unknown   There are currently no licensed mRNA vaccines in the United 
States. However, researchers have been studying them for decades.  https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/covid-
19/hcp/mrna-vaccine-basics.html 

[5] Janssen Biotech, Inc.” https://www.janssencovid19vaccine.com/hcp/how-its-designed.html 

… “The vaccine contains a recombinant, replication-incompetent human adenovirus serotype 26 (AD26) vector, 
encoding the SARS-CoV-2 viral spike (S) glycoprotein, stabilized in its pre-fusion form.  It is an investigational 
vaccine not licensed for any indication.”   See FDA letter 2/27/01 to Janssen Biotech, Inc. granting “Emergency Use 
Authorization (EUA).” 

[6] https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/health/oxford-astrazeneca-covid-19-vaccine.html 

[7] https://www.fda.gov/vaccines-blood-biologics/vaccines/emergency-use-authorization-vaccines-explained 

Page 22 of 63

[8]‘Over more than 3 decades, promising lipids studied in the lab often failed to live up to their potential when 
tested in animals or humans. Positively charged lipids are inherently toxic, and companies struggled for years 
before landing on formulations that were safe and effective. When injected intravenously, the particles invariably 
accumulated in the liver, and delivery to other organs is still an obstacle. Reliably manufacturing consistent LNPs 
was another challenge, and producing the raw materials needed to make the particles is a limiting factor in the 
production of COVID-19 vaccines today.’ 

Without these lipid shells, there would be no mRNA vaccines for COVID-19, by Ryan Cross, Chemical & Engineering 
News, March 6, 2021.  https://cen.acs.org/pharmaceuticals/drug-delivery/Without-lipid-shells-mRNA-
vaccines/99/i8 

[9]  ADVERSE EFFECTS OF MESSENGER RNA VACCINES An Evidence Review from the Penn Medicine Center for 
Evidence-based, Practice December 2020, director Nikhil K. Mull, MD  (CEP) Lead analyst: Matthew D. Mitchell, 
PhD  (CEP)Clinical review Patrick J. Brennan, MD. 
(CMO)http://www.uphs.upenn.edu/cep/COVID/mRNA%20vaccine%20review%20final.pdf at p.11, Primary Studies. 

 [10] According to the Section 564 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, a lawful application of the terms of 
a lawful emergency use authorization (“EUA”) pursuant includes (e)(1)(A)(i)(III): 

(III) of the option to accept or refuse administration of the product, of the consequences, if any, of refusing 
administration of the product, and of the alternatives to the product that are available and of their benefits and 
risks. 

21 USCS § 360bbb-3 https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/21/360bbb-3 

[11] (II) of the significant known and potential benefits and risks of such use, and of the extent to which such 
benefits and risks are unknown. 

21 USCS § 360bbb-3 https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/21/360bbb-3 

How will vaccine recipients be informed about the benefits and risks of any vaccine that receives an EUA? 

FDA must ensure that recipients of the vaccine under an EUA are informed, to the extent practicable given the 
applicable circumstances, that FDA has authorized the emergency use of the vaccine, of the known and potential 
benefits and risks, the extent to which such benefits and risks are unknown, that they have the option to accept 
or refuse the vaccine, and of any available alternatives to the product. Typically, this information is communicated 
in a patient “fact sheet.” The FDA posts these fact sheets on our website. 

https://www.fda.gov/vaccines-blood-biologics/vaccines/emergency-use-authorization-vaccines-explained 

[12] “The federal EEO laws do not prevent an employer from requiring all employees physically entering the 
workplace to be vaccinated for COVID-19, subject to the reasonable accommodation provisions of Title VII and the 
ADA and other EEO considerations discussed below.  These principles apply if an employee gets the vaccine in the 
community or from the employer.”  https://www.eeoc.gov/wysk/what-you-should-know-about-covid-19-and-ada-
rehabilitation-act-and-other-eeo-laws 

[13] Fetal Cell Lines Were Used to Make the Johnson & Johnson COVID Vaccine—Here’s What That Means 

3/4/2021, MSN.com, https://www.msn.com/en-us/health/medical/fetal-cell-lines-were-used-to-make-the-
johnson-and-johnson-covid-vaccine%E2%80%94heres-what-that-means/ar-BB1efi8p 

Page 23 of 63

[14] PHI is an acronym of Protected Health Information, while PII is an acronym of Personally Identifiable 
Information — while you can always waive your privacy rights, you have the right to determine your own release 
of private medical information.  https://www.hipaajournal.com/what-is-considered-phi/ 

[15] On May 17, 2021, the CDC stated: The VaST session on May 17, 2021, included several presentations on 
myocarditis following mRNA vaccines, from the Department of Defense (DoD), the Vaccine Adverse Event 
Reporting System (VAERS), and Vaccine Safety Datalink (VSD). There were also brief updates from the Veteran’s 
Administration (VA) and the Clinical Immunization Safety Assessment (CISA) groups about their plans for future 
investigation of myocarditis.  COVID-19 VaST Work Group Technical Report – May 17, 
2021.  https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nvss/vsrr/covid_weekly/index.htm?fbclid=IwAR2-
muRM3tB3uBdbTrmKwH1NdaBx6PpZo2kxotNwkUXlnbZXCwSRP2OmqsI 

[16a]  https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/clinical-guidance-management-patients.html#print (citing 
f.n. 39.) 

[16b] Nobel Prize Winner Warns Vaccines Facilitate Development of Deadlier COVID Variants, Urges Public to 
Reject Jabs, by Veronika Kyrylenko, The New American, May 20, 2021: https://thenewamerican.com/french-nobel-
prize-winner-warns-vaccines-facilitate-development-of-deadlier-covid-variants-urges-the-public-to-reject-jabs/ 

 [17] Exclusive: Athlete Who Recovered From COVID Facing ‘Very Different Future’ After Second Dose of Pfizer 
Vaccine Triggers Myocarditis, by Megan Redshaw, 06/21/21, the Defender, Children’s Health 
Defense  https://childrenshealthdefense.org/defender/greyson-follmer-pfizer-vaccine-
myocarditis/?utm_source=salsa&eType=EmailBlastContent&eId=faf15c81-fc5a-4174-bb39-70c908f37be8 

 [18] CD8+ T cell responses in COVID-19 convalescent individuals target conserved epitopes from multiple 
prominent SARS-CoV-2 circulating variants – PubMed 

https://na01.safelinks.protection.outlook.com/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fpubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov%2F33594378%2F
&amp;data=04%7C01%7C%7Cf496c029c7a546320c2508d8f90cf35b%7C84df9e7fe9f640afb435aaaaaaaaaaaa%7C1
%7C0%7C637533181300658523%7CUnknown%7CTWFpbGZsb3d8eyJWIjoiMC4wLjAwMDAiLCJQIjoiV2luMzIiLCJBTiI
6Ik1haWwiLCJXVCI6Mn0%3D%7C1000&amp;sdata=daj%2FesDTdKPA8V669M48HmIOBTkXVmFrGKu5pqJZAZE%3D
&amp;reserved=0 

 [19] Lasting immunity found after recovery from COVID-19, National Institutes of Health, January 26, 2021 
https://www.nih.gov/news-events/nih-research-matters/lasting-immunity-found-after-recovery-covid-
19?fbclid=IwAR0NvW6PWXlK4xIf7yTulxhYagh6qAaSL4cZbVCJXmjuON-q4Lsz6A9Wa24 

[20] Frequently Asked Questions about COVID-19 Vaccination, “If I have already had COVID-19 and recovered, do I 
still need to get vaccinated with a COVID-19 vaccination? https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-
ncov/vaccines/faq.html 

[21] CDC, Definition of Terms https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/vac-gen/imz-
basics.htm#:~:text=Definition%20of%20Terms,-
Let’s%20start%20by&text=Vaccine%3A%20A%20product%20that%20stimulates,or%20sprayed%20into%20the%20
nose. 

[22] See the Petition for a Temporary Restraining Order filed this week in the U.S. District Court for the Northern 
District of Alabama by America’s FrontLine Doctors, 2:21-cv-00702, CLM. 

[23] https://finance.yahoo.com/news/hydroxychloroquine-90-percent-chance-helping-155637974.html 

Page 24 of 63

 [24] https://finance.yahoo.com/news/hydroxychloroquine-90-percent-chance-helping-155637974.html 

[25] https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33278625/ 

[26] https://www.fda.gov/news-events/press-announcements/coronavirus-covid-19-update-june-25-2021 

REFERENCES 

2: The Lozier Institute Lists a number of COVID-19 Vaccines which utilize aborted fetal cells - https://lozierinstitute.org/update-covid-19-vaccine-
candidates-and-abortion-derived-cell-lines/ 

3: The Pfizer Vaccine utilized aborted fetal cells - https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.09.08.280818v1.full 

4: The Moderna Vaccine utilized aborted fetal cells - https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-020-2622-0   

5: The Johnson & Johnson Vaccine utilized aborted fetal cells - https://www.janssen.com/emea/emea/janssen-vaccine-technologies 

6: Sputnik V Vaccine citing trial tests of their manufacturers = https://sputnikvaccine.com/about-vaccine/human-adenoviral-vaccines/  

7: Sputnik V manufacturers acknowledge usage of aborted fetal cells - http://actanaturae.ru/2075-8251/article/view/10302/106  

8: The UK Government acknowledges AstraZeneca’s usage of aborted fetal cells - https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/regulatory-
approval-of-covid-19-vaccine-astrazeneca/information-for-healthcare-professionals-on-covid-19-vaccine-astrazeneca-regulation-174  

9: The Vaxxart Vaccine utilized aborted fetal cells - https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.09.04.283853v1.full  

10. The Altimmune Vaccine utilized aborted fetal cells - https://clinicaltrials.gov/ProvidedDocs/67/NCT03232567/Prot_000.pdf  

11. The COVAXX Vaccine utilized aborted fetal cells - https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.11.30.399154v1.full  

12. The Medicago Vaccine utilized aborted fetal cells - https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.11.04.20226282v1.full-text  

13. The Novavax Vaccine utilized aborted fetal cells - https://science.sciencemag.org/content/370/6520/1089  

14. PittCoVacc utilized aborted fetal cells - https://www.thelancet.com/journals/ebiom/article/PIIS2352-3964(20)30118-3/fulltext  

15. The Walter Reed Vaccine utilized fetal cells - https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.04.28.441763v1.full  

16. The Sanofi Vaccine utilized aborted fetal cells - https://www.nature.com/articles/s41541-021-00324-5  

17. The Inovio Vaccine utilized aborted fetal cells - https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-020-16505-0  

18. The Arcturus Vaccine utilized aborted fetal cells – https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.09.03.280446v1  

19. The Imperial College Vaccine utilized aborted fetal cells - https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.04.22.055608v1  

20. The Providence Vaccine utilized aborted fetal cells - https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.05.11.443286v1 

21. CoronaVac utilized aborted fetal cells - https://science.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2020/05/05/science.abc1932.DC1  

22. The CanSino Vaccine utilized aborted fetal cells - https://science.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2020/05/05/science.abc1932.DC1  

23. The ImmunityBio Vaccine utilized aborted fetal cells – https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.07.29.227595v1.full  

24. The Institut Pasteur Vaccine utilized aborted fetal cells - https://www.pnas.org/content/pnas/117/51/32657.full.pdf  

25. The Rega Vaccine utilized aborted fetal cells - https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-020-3035-9  

26. The Anhui Zhifei Vaccine utilized aborted fetal cells - https://www.cell.com/cell/fulltext/S0092-8674(20)30812-6  

27. The Clover Vaccine utilized aborted fetal cells - https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.09.24.311027v1.full  

Page 25 of 63

 
 
 
DEMAND FOR A RELIGIOUS EXCEPTION TO THE COVID-19 VACCINATION REQUIREMENT  

Government-wide policy requires all Federal employees as defined in 5 U.S.C. § 2105 to be vaccinated  
against COVID-19, with exceptions only as required by law. In certain circumstances, Federal law may  
entitle a Federal employee who has a religious objection to the COVID-19 vaccination requirement to an  
exception from that requirement, in which case the employee would instead comply with alternative  
health and safety protocols. The Federal Government is committed to respecting the important legal  
protections for religious liberty. The purpose of this form is to determine whether you may be eligible  
for an exception.  

To be eligible for a possible exception, you must first establish that your refusal to be vaccinated is  
based upon a sincere belief that is religious in nature. A refusal to be vaccinated does not qualify for an  
exception if it is based upon personal preference, concerns about the possible effects of the vaccine, or  
political opinions.  

In order to request a religious exception, please fill out this form. The agency may ask for other  
information as needed to determine if you are legally entitled to an exception.  

Signing this form constitutes a declaration that the information you provide is, to the best of your  
knowledge and ability, true and correct. Any intentional misrepresentation to the Federal Government  
may result in legal consequences, including termination or removal from Federal Service.  

QUESTIONS:  

1.  

Please describe the nature of your objection to the COVID-19 vaccination requirement.  

RESPONSE: 

As the Supreme Court has recognized, employees’ “religious beliefs need not 

be acceptable, logical, consistent, or comprehensible to others in order to merit [legal] protection.” 
Thomas v. Review Bd. of Ind. Emp’t Sec. Div., 450 U.S. 707, 714 (1981); see also Church of the Lukumi 
Babalu Aye, Inc. v. City of Hialeah, 508 U.S. 520,  531 (1993) (same). Additionally, though membership 
in or adherence to the tenets of an organized religion is plainly sufficient to provide protection for an 
individual’s sincerely held religious beliefs, it is not a necessary precondition. See Frazee v. Ill. Dep’t of 
Emp’t Sec., 489 U.S. 829, 834 (1989) (“Undoubtedly, membership in an organized religious 
denomination, especially one with a specific tenet forbidding members to work on Sunday, would 
simplify the problem of identifying sincerely held religious beliefs, but we reject the notion that to claim 
the protection [for sincerely held religious beliefs], one must be responding to the commands of 
a particular religious organization.” (emphasis added)); see also Office of Foreign Assets Control v. 
Voices in the Wilderness, 329 F. Supp. 2d 71, 81 (D.D.C. 2004) (noting that the law provides protection 
for “sincerely held religious beliefs,” “not just tenets of organized religion”). 

2.  

Would complying with the COVID-19 vaccination requirement substantially burden your religious  

exercise?  If so, please explain how.  

RESPONSE: 

As the Supreme Court has recognized, employees’ “religious beliefs need not be acceptable, 
logical, consistent, or comprehensible to others in order to merit [legal] protection.” Thomas v. Review Bd. of Ind. Emp’t 
Sec. Div., 450 U.S. 707, 714 (1981); see also Church of the Lukumi Babalu Aye, Inc. v. City of Hialeah, 508 U.S. 520,  531 
(1993) (same). Additionally, though membership in or adherence to the tenets of an organized religion is plainly 
sufficient to provide protection for an individual’s sincerely held religious beliefs, it is not a necessary precondition. See 
Frazee v. Ill. Dep’t of Emp’t Sec., 489 U.S. 829, 834 (1989) (“Undoubtedly, membership in an organized religious 
denomination, especially one with a specific tenet forbidding members to work on Sunday, would simplify the problem 
of identifying sincerely held religious beliefs, but we reject the notion that to claim the protection [for sincerely held 
religious beliefs], one must be responding to the commands of a particular religious organization.” (emphasis added)); 
see also Office of Foreign Assets Control v. Voices in the Wilderness, 329 F. Supp. 2d 71, 81 (D.D.C. 2004) (noting that 
the law provides protection for “sincerely held religious beliefs,” “not just tenets of organized religion”). 

RESPONSE:  

The Emergency Use Authorization Statute Prohibits Mandating the Currently Available 

COVID-19 Vaccines: The United States Code provides: [S]ubject to the provisions of this section, the Secretary (of the 
Department of Health and Human Services) may authorize the introduction into interstate commerce, during the 
effective period of a declaration under subsection (b), of a drug, device, or biological product intended for use in an 
actual or potential emergency (referred to in this section as an “emergency use.” 21 U.S.C. § 360bbb-3(a)(1) (emphasis 

Page 26 of 63

  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
added) [hereinafter EUA Statute]. As an essential part of the explicit statutory conditions for EUA, the EUA Statute 
mandates that all individuals to whom the EUA product may be administered be given the option to accept or refuse 
administration of the product. See 21 U.S.C. § 360bbb-3(e)(1)(A)(ii)(III) (requiring that “individual to whom the product 
is administered are informed . . . of the option to accept or refuse administration of the product” (emphasis added)). 
The only currently available COVID-19 vaccines (Janssen/Johnson & Johnson, Moderna, and Pfizer-BioNTech) are only 
authorized for use under the EUA Statute and have no general approval under federal law. Thus, the administration of 
such vaccines cannot be mandatory under the plain text of the EUA Statute. 
The statutorily required Fact Sheets for each of the EUA COVID-19 vaccines acknowledge that individuals cannot be 
compelled to accept or receive the vaccine. See Moderna, Fact Sheet for Recipients and Caregivers (June 24, 2021), 
https://www.fda.gov/media/144638/download (“It is your choice to receive or not to receive the Moderna COVID-19 
Vaccine. Should you decide not to receive it, it will not change your standard medical care.” (emphasis added)); Pfizer-
BioNTech, Fact Sheet for Recipients and Caregivers (June 25, 2021), https://www.fda.gov/media/144414/download (“It 
is your choice to receive or not to receive the Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 Vaccine. Should you decide not to receive it, it 
will not change your standard medical care.” (emphasis added)); Janssen, Fact Sheet for Recipients and Caregivers (July 
8, 2021), https://www.fda.gov/media/146305/download (“It is your choice to receive or not to receive the Janssen 
COVID-19 Vaccine. Should you decide not to receive it, it will not change your standard medical care.” (emphasis 
added)). 

3.  

How long have you held the religious belief underlying your objection? 

RESPONSE: 

As the Supreme Court has recognized, employees’ religious beliefs need not be acceptable, 

logical, consistent, or comprehensible to others in order to merit [legal] protection.” Thomas v. Review Bd. of Ind. 
Emp’t Sec. Div., 450 U.S. 707, 714 (1981); see also Church of the Lukumi Babalu Aye, Inc. v. City of Hialeah, 508 U.S. 
520,  531 (1993) (same). Additionally, though membership in or adherence to the tenets of an organized religion is 
plainly sufficient to provide protection for an individual’s sincerely held religious beliefs, it is not a necessary 
precondition. See Frazee v. Ill. Dep’t of Emp’t Sec., 489 U.S. 829, 834 (1989) (“Undoubtedly, membership in an 
organized religious denomination, especially one with a specific tenet forbidding members to work on Sunday, would 
simplify the problem of identifying sincerely held religious beliefs, but we reject the notion that to claim the  
protection [for sincerely held religious beliefs], one must be responding to the commands of a particular religious 
organization.” (emphasis added)); see also Office of Foreign Assets Control v. Voices in the Wilderness, 329 F. Supp. 
2d 71, 81 (D.D.C. 2004) (noting that the law provides protection for “sincerely held religious beliefs,” “not just tenets 
of organized religion”). 

4.  

Please describe whether, as an adult, you have received any vaccines against any other diseases  

(such as a flu vaccine or a tetanus vaccine) and, if so, what vaccine you most recently received and  
when, to the best of your recollection.  

RESPONSE:  

To the best of my recollection, 12/1969 while in the US Navy, approximately 51 years  
and 10 months ago 

.

5.  

If you do not have a religious objection to the use of all vaccines, please explain why your objection  

is limited to particular vaccines.  

RESPONSE:  

The Emergency Use Authorization Statute Prohibits Mandating the Currently Available 

COVID-19 Vaccines: The United States Code provides: [S]ubject to the provisions of this section, the Secretary (of the 
Department of Health and Human Services) may authorize the introduction into interstate commerce, during the 
effective period of a declaration under subsection (b), of a drug, device, or biological product intended for use in an 
actual or potential emergency (referred to in this section as an “emergency use.” 21 U.S.C. § 360bbb-3(a)(1) 
(emphasis added) [hereinafter EUA Statute]. As an essential part of the explicit statutory conditions for EUA, the EUA 
Statute mandates that all individuals to whom the EUA product may be administered be given the option to accept or 
refuse administration of the product. See 21 U.S.C. § 360bbb-3(e)(1)(A)(ii)(III) (requiring that “individual to whom the 
product is administered are informed . . . of the option to accept or refuse administration of the product” (emphasis 
added)). The only currently available COVID-19 vaccines (Janssen/Johnson & Johnson, Moderna, and Pfizer-BioNTech) 
are only authorized for use under the EUA Statute and have no general approval under federal law. Thus, the 
administration of such vaccines cannot be mandatory under the plain text of the EUA Statute. 
The statutorily required Fact Sheets for each of the EUA COVID-19 vaccines acknowledge that individuals cannot be 
compelled to accept or receive the vaccine. See Moderna, Fact Sheet for Recipients and Caregivers (June 24, 2021), 
https://www.fda.gov/media/144638/download (“It is your choice to receive or not to receive the Moderna COVID-19 
Vaccine. Should you decide not to receive it, it will not change your standard medical care.” (emphasis added)); 
Pfizer-BioNTech, Fact Sheet for Recipients and Caregivers (June 25, 2021), 

Page 27 of 63

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
https://www.fda.gov/media/144414/download  (“It is your choice to receive or not to receive the Pfizer-BioNTech 
COVID-19 Vaccine. Should you decide not to receive it, it will not change your standard medical care.” (emphasis 
added)); Janssen, Fact Sheet for Recipients and Caregivers (July 8, 2021), 
https://www.fda.gov/media/146305/download (“It is your choice to receive or not to receive the Janssen COVID-19 
Vaccine. Should you decide not to receive it, it will not change your standard medical care.” (emphasis added)). 

6.  

If there are any other medicines or products that you do not use because of the religious belief  

underlying your objection, please identify them.  

7.  

Please provide any additional information that you think may be helpful in reviewing your request.  

I Max J Meindl do hereby stipulate: “I understand the above is your position. I am signing this document 
without waiver of y legal right to seek religious exemption and accommodation from any requirement 
that conflicts with my sincerely held religious beliefs, and without waiver of the right to seek legal 
redress from any wrongful denial of such exemption or accommodation.” 

I declare to the best of my knowledge and ability that the foregoing is true and correct.  

Max J Meindl 
Print Name  

        Signature  

Date  

Page 28 of 63

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA 
109 Second Street NE 
Washington, DC 20002 
Tel 202-289-1776 
Fax 407-875-0770 

LC.org 

FLORIDA 
PO Box 540774 
Orlando, FL 32854 
Tel 407-875-1776 
Fax 407-875-0770 

REPLY TO FLORIDA 

VIRGINIA 
PO Box 11108 
Lynchburg, VA 24506 
Tel 407-875-1776 
Fax 407-875-0770 
Liberty@LC.org 

QUESTIONING THE ORTHODOXY OF SINCERELY HELD RELIGIOUS BELIEFS 
OR REQUIRING A CLERGY, PLACE OF WORSHIP, OR A THIRD PARTY TO 
AGREE WITH OR AFFIRM SUCH RELIGIOUS BELIEFS IS UNLAWFUL 

Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 prohibits employers from discriminating against 
its employees on the basis of their sincerely held religious beliefs. See 42 U.S.C. §2000e-2(a) (“It 
shall  be  an  unlawful  employment  practice  for  an  employer  .  .  .  to  fail  or  refuse  to  hire  or  to 
discharge any individual, or otherwise to discriminate against any individual with respect to his 
compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment because of such individual’s race, 
color, religion, sex, or national origin”); see also EEOC v. Abercrombie & Fitch Stores, Inc., 575 
U.S. 768 (2015) (same). Title VII defines “religion” as “all aspects of religious observance and 
practice, as well as belief.” 42 U.S.C. §2000e(j). Moreover, as the EEOC has made clear, Title 
VII’s protections also extend nonreligious beliefs if related to morality, ultimate ideas about 
life, purpose, and death. See EEOC, Questions and Answers: Religious Discrimination in the 
Workplace (June 7, 2008), (“Title VII’s protections also extend to those who are discriminated 
against or need accommodation because they profess no religious beliefs . . . . Religious beliefs 
include theistic beliefs, i.e. those that include a belief in  God as  well as  non-theistic ‘moral  or 
ethical beliefs as to what is right and wrong which are sincerely held with the strength of traditional 
religious  views.’  Although  courts  generally  resolve  doubts  about  particular  beliefs  in  favor  of 
finding that they are  religious, beliefs are not  protected merely  because they are strongly  held. 
Rather, religion typically concerns ‘ultimate ideas’ about ‘life, purpose, and death’”). 

Employees  may  have  religious  accommodation  requests  stating  their  sincerely  held 
religious beliefs injecting any of the three currently available COVID-19 vaccines would be a sin 
and a violation of their religious beliefs because they are manufactured and produced with, tested 
on,  or  otherwise  developmentally  connected  to  aborted  fetal  cell  lines.  Many  employers  have 
responded to employee submissions with intrusive and irrelevant questions about employees’ past 
personal health decisions and the theological bases for those decisions, or demands that employees 
vet  their  religious  beliefs  about  COVID-19  vaccines  with  a  third  party  to  justify  their 
accommodation  requests.  The  premises  of  these  questions—that  an  employee’s  current 
request  for  religious  accommodation  must  be consistent  with  the  employees’  prior  health 
decisions and religious understandings, or must be acknowledged by a person other than the 
employee—are legally invalid premises for deciding religious accommodation requests, and 
any denial based on such premises violates Title VII. 

Employers  are  not  permitted  to  determine  which  religious  adherent  has  a  “correct”  or 
“proper” or “valid” understanding of religious doctrine, or whether any employee’s sincerely held 

Page 29 of 63

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Unlawful Conditions for Religious Exemptions 
October 6, 2021Page 2 

religious beliefs are shared broadly among other faithful. As the Supreme Court has recognized, 
employees’  “religious  beliefs  need  not  be  acceptable,  logical,  consistent,  or  comprehensible  to 
others in order to merit [legal] protection.” Thomas v. Review Bd. of Ind. Emp’t Sec. Div., 450 U.S. 
707, 714 (1981); see also Church of the Lukumi Babalu Aye, Inc. v. City of Hialeah, 508 U.S. 520, 
531 (1993) (same). Additionally, though membership in or adherence to the tenets of an organized 
religion  is  plainly  sufficient  to  provide  protection  for  an  individual’s  sincerely  held  religious 
beliefs, it is not a necessary precondition. See Frazee v. Ill. Dep’t of Emp’t Sec., 489 U.S. 829, 834 
(1989) (“Undoubtedly, membership in an organized religious denomination, especially one 
with a specific tenet forbidding members to work on Sunday, would simplify the problem of 
identifying  sincerely  held  religious  beliefs,  but  we  reject  the  notion  that  to  claim  the 
protection [for sincerely held religious beliefs], one must be responding to the commands of 
a  particular  religious  organization.”  (emphasis  added));  see  also  Office  of  Foreign  Assets 
Control v. Voices in the Wilderness, 329 F. Supp. 2d 71, 81 (D.D.C. 2004) (noting that the law 
provides protection for “sincerely held religious beliefs,” “not just tenets of organized religion”). 

In fact, the law provides protection for sincerely  held religious beliefs even when some 
members  of  the  same  religious  organization,  sect,  or  denomination  disagree  with  the  beliefs 
espoused by the individual. That some individuals may have sincerely held religious beliefs which 
differ  from  those  sincerely  held  by  the  employees  requesting  accommodation  is  irrelevant  to 
whether the employees’ sincerely held religious beliefs are entitled to protection under Title VII. 
Indeed, 

[i]ntrafaith differences of that kind are not uncommon among 
followers  of  a  particular  creed,  and  the  judicial  process  is 
singularly ill equipped to resolve such differences  . . . and  the 
guarantee  of  free  exercise  is  not  limited  to  beliefs  which  are 
shared by all of the members of a religious sect. Particularly in 
this  sensitive  area,  it  is  not  within  the  judicial  function  and 
judicial  competence  to  inquire  whether  the  petitioner  or  his 
fellow worker more correctly perceived the commands of their 
common 
faith.  Courts  are  not  arbiters  of  scriptural 
interpretation.  

450 U.S. at 715–16 (emphasis added). 

The denial of any employee’s request for a religious accommodation based upon the views 
of  other  individuals  who  do  not  share  the  employee’s  beliefs  is  unlawful.  In  fact,  it  is  legally 
irrelevant what other individuals think or religiously believe. Nor does an employee’s religious 
objection to a vaccine need to be unique in order to be personal and sincerely held. (Cf. supra “It 
appears you purchased or downloaded your supporting documentation on the internet.”) Once an 
employee  has  articulated  the  employee’s  sincerely  held  religious  objections  to  the  currently 
available COVID-19 vaccines, whether those objections are the same as or nothing like any other 
person’s objections, the proper inquiry is at its end.  

Indisputably,  all  three  of  the  currently  available  COVID-19  vaccines  are  produced  by, 
derived from, manufactured with, tested on, developed with, or otherwise connected to aborted 
fetal cell lines. There is no question about the accuracy of this determination. The North Dakota 

Page 30 of 63

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Unlawful Conditions for Religious Exemptions 
October 6, 2021Page 3 

Department  of  Health,  in  its  handout  literature  for  those  considering  one  of  the  COVID-19 
vaccines, notes the following: “The non-replicating viral vector vaccine produced by Johnson & 
Johnson did require the use of fetal cell cultures, specifically PER.C6, in order to produce 
and manufacture the vaccine.” N.D. Health, COVID-19 Vaccines & Fetal Cell Lines (Apr. 20, 
2021), 
https://www.health.nd.gov/sites/www/files/documents/COVID%20Vaccine%20Page/ 
COVID-19_Vaccine_Fetal_Cell_Handout.pdf (emphasis added) (last visited Aug. 27, 2021).  

The  Louisiana  Department  of  Health  likewise  confirms  that  the  Johnson  &  Johnson 
COVID-19 vaccine used the PER.C6 fetal cell line, which “is a retinal cell line that was isolated 
from a terminated fetus in 1985.” La. Dep’t of Public Health, You Have Questions, We Have 
Answers:  COVID-19  Vaccine  FAQ  (Dec.  21,  2020),  https://ldh.la.gov/assets/oph/Center-
PHCH/Center-PH/immunizations/You_Have_Qs_COVID-19_Vaccine_FAQ.pdf 
(emphasis 
added) (last visited Aug. 27, 2021). 

The same is true of the Moderna and Pfizer-BioNTech mRNA vaccines. The Louisiana 
Department of Health’s publications again confirm that aborted fetal cells lines were used in the 
“proof of concept” phase of the development of their COVID-19 mRNA vaccines. See La. Dep’t 
of Public Health, supra. The North Dakota Department of Health likewise confirms: “Early in the 
development  of  mRNA  vaccine  technology,  fetal  cells  were  used  for  ‘proof  of  concept’  (to 
demonstrate how a cell could take up mRNA and produce the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein) 
or to characterize the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein.” N.D. Health, supra (emphasis added). 

Because  all  three  of  the  currently  available  COVID-19  vaccines  are  developed  and 
produced from, tested with, researched on, or otherwise connected with the aborted fetal cell lines 
HEK-293 and PER.C6, many employees’ sincerely held religious beliefs compel them to abstain 
from  accepting or injecting any of these products into  their  bodies, regardless of the perceived 
benefits  or  rationales.  Thus,  while  there  may  be  some  faith  leaders  and  other  adherents  whose 
understanding of Scripture is different, and who may be willing to accept one of the three currently 
available COVID-19 vaccines despite their connection with aborted fetal cell lines, any employee 
is entitled to interpret the Scriptural command against murder differently, which many indisputably 
do.  

Many employees have sincerely held religious beliefs that God forms children in the womb 
and knows them prior to their birth, and that because of this, life is sacred from the moment of 
conception to natural death. See Psalm 139:13–14 (ESV) (“For you formed my inward parts; you 
knitted  me  together  in  my  mother’s  womb.  I  praise  you,  for  I  am  fearfully  and  wonderfully 
made.”);  Psalm  139:16  (ESV)  (“Your  eyes  saw  my  unformed  substance;  in  your  book  were 
written,  every  one  of  them,  the  days  that  were  formed  for  me,  when  as  yet  there  was  none  of 
them.”); Isaiah  44:2 (“Thus says the Lord who  made you, who formed  you from  the  womb”); 
Isaiah 44:24 (“Thus says the Lord, your Redeemer, who formed you from the womb: ‘I am the 
Lord, who made all things’”); Isaiah 49:1 (“The Lord called me from the womb, from the body of 
my mother he named my name”); Isaiah 49:5 (“And now the Lord says, he who formed me from 
the womb to be his servant,”); Jeremiah 1:5 (“Before I formed you in the womb I knew you, and 
before you were born I consecrated you; I appointed you a prophet to the nations”).  

Employees may also have sincerely held religious beliefs that every child’s life is sacred 
because each is made in the image of God. See Genesis 1:26–27 (“Then God said, “Let us make 

Page 31 of 63

 
 
 
 
 
Unlawful Conditions for Religious Exemptions 
October 6, 2021Page 4 

man in our image, after our likeness…. So God created man in his own image, in the image of God 
he created him; male and female he created them.”). 

Many employees also have sincerely held religious beliefs that because life is sacred from 
the moment of conception, the killing of that innocent life is the murder of an innocent human in 
violation of Scripture. See, e.g., Exodus 20:13 (“You shall not murder”); Exodus 21:22–23 (setting 
the penalty as death for even the accidental killing of an unborn child); Exodus 23:7 (“do not kill 
the innocent and righteous”); Genesis 9:6 (“Whoever sheds the blood of man, by man shall his 
blood be shed, for God made man in his own image.”); Deuteronomy 27:25 (“Cursed be anyone 
that takes a bride to shed innocent blood”); Proverbs 6:16–17 (“There are six things that the Lord 
hates, seven that are an abomination to him:. . . hands that shed innocent blood”). 

The Hebrew word for “abomination” in the text above is ה ָבֵעוֹת (to`eba). The verbal form 
is  “abhor,”  “loath,”  “detest,”  and  “exclude.”  Twelve  times  the  Book  of  Proverbs  uses  ה ָבֵעוֹת  in 
reference to an “abomination to the LORD.” (הוהי or Yahweh). The word is also used in conjunction 
with the Ammonites and the Ashtoreth, the Sidonians, Chemosth, and Moab. Some of these nations 
sacrificed their children to Baal. Indeed, Jeremiah 19:4-9, refers to the shedding of innocent blood 
by  sacrificing  children  as  the  reason  for  judgement  against  Judah.  Abortion  is  the  modern-day 
sacrifice of children made in the image of God. Many employees do not want to be part of such an 
“abomination.” They do not want indirectly or directly be in any way associated with abortion. To 
do so is abhorrent, loathsome, detestable, abominable to God. In short, to require these employees 
to inject a substance into their bodies that has any association (no matter how near or remote to 
abortion) is a sin against their Creator, their Lord, and their Savior. 

Employees  may  also  have  sincerely  held  religious  beliefs  that  it  would  be  better  to  tie 
millstones around their necks and be drowned in the sea than to bring harm to an innocent child. 
See Matthew 18:6; Luke 17:2. 

Many employees also have sincerely held religious beliefs that their bodies are temples of 
the Holy Spirit, and that to inject medical products that have any connection whatsoever to aborted 
fetal cell lines would be defiling the temple of the Holy Spirit. (See 1 Corinthians 6:15-20 (KJV) 
(“Do you not know that your bodies are members of Christ?. . . Or do you not know that your body 
is a temple of the Holy Spirit within you, whom you have from God? You are not your own, for 
you were bought with a price. So glorify God in your body.”). 

Thus, while there may be leaders and other adherents of certain employees’ faith traditions 
whose understanding of Scripture is different, and who may be willing to accept one of the three 
currently available COVID-19 vaccines despite their association with aborted fetal cell lines, that 
is irrelevant to the protection of employees who sincerely believe otherwise. Likewise irrelevant 
is whether any employee currently seeking a religious exemption formerly understood or believed 
any religious doctrine differently. Because all three of the currently available COVID-19 vaccines 
are developed, produced from, tested with, researched on, or otherwise associated with the aborted 
fetal cell lines HEK-293 and PER.C6, many employees’ sincerely held religious beliefs compel 
them to abstain from accepting or injecting any of these products into their body, regardless of the 
perceived benefits or rationales. 

Page 32 of 63

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Unlawful Conditions for Religious Exemptions 
October 6, 2021Page 5 

Requiring employees that to obtain a religious exemption they have to be an adherent of a 
recognized religion with a history of opposition to vaccines. Employees are also being told they 
need to  include a letter from  a clergy to  support their sincere religious beliefs. This  is false  ad 
unlawful. The only  issue is  whether the employee has  a sincere  religious belief, not  whether a 
clergy or a “recognized religion” (whatever that is) agrees. 

In  sum,  it  is  unlawful  to  condition  any  employee’s  request  for  religious 
accommodation on a third party’s beliefs or acknowledgement of the employee’s beliefs, or 
on the employee’s past health decisions or the theological reasons for those decisions. 

EMPLOYERS CAN REASONABLY ACCOMMODATE THEIR EMPLOYEES 

In the air travel context, when boarding an Alaska Air flight, passengers at the boarding 

gate see a pop-up sign: 

IT’S SAFE 
TO FLY—AND 
EXPERTS AGREE. 

Travelers wearing a mask have a .003% or 
NEAR-ZERO CHANCE 
of being exposed to the virus, 
even on a full aircraft 
according to a recent Department of Defense study.1 

Air travel is the safest mode of 
Transportation thanks to . . . 

HOSPITAL-GRADE AIR FILTRATION . . . . 

CLEAN AIR EXCHANGE . . . . 
According to researchers at Harvard.2 

TOP-DOWN AIR FLOW . . . . 

The Department  of Defense study  referenced  on  the sign  was  done in  conjunction  with 
United Airlines. It is hypocritical for airlines, particularly United Airlines, to feign the need for 

1  
David Silcott, et al., TRANSCOM/AMC Commercial Aircraft Cabin Aerosol Dispersion 
Tests, https://www.ustranscom.mil/cmd/docs/TRANSCOM%20Report%20Final.pdf (last visited 
Aug. 27, 2021). 
2  
Harvard  T.H.  Chan  School  of  Public  Health,  Assessment  of  Risks  of  SARS-CoV-2 
Transmission during Air Travel and Non-Pharmaceutical Interventions to Reduce Risk, Phase One 
Report:  Gate-to-Gate 
https://cdn1.sph.harvard.edu/wp-
content/uploads/sites/2443/2020/10/Phase-One-Report-Highlights-1.pdf  (last  visited  Aug.  27, 
2021). 

Travel  Onboard 

Aircraft, 

Page 33 of 63

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Unlawful Conditions for Religious Exemptions 
October 6, 2021Page 6 

universal employee vaccination when there is a study being touted by airlines as concluding the 
risk of air traveler exposure to be 0.003%, or “NEAR-ZERO CHANCE.”  

The above example  applies to  airlines, but the same reasoning is  true of  all employers. 
Healthcare professionals have worked for months through the pandemic without the shots. Other 
employees have either worked onsite or remote, and thus employers have demonstrated over many 
months that they can reasonably accommodate all employees. 

The accommodation employees are requesting from any employer no matter the specific 
job duty is an exemption from the COVID-19 shots. Past history is prologue in this respect, as (1) 
employers  have  been  providing  such  accommodation  ever  since  the  first  COVID-19  shot  was 
available to the public in  December 2020,  (2)  all  phases  of the  employment sectors have been 
working through the pandemic up to the present, even during the peak of COVID-19, without the 
shots, even if some of the work was done remotely; (3) the Delta variant has been in the United 
States for months, and employees continued to work through the present without the COVID-19 
shots; (4) many health and safety measures have been implemented to protect the health and safety 
of  employees  and  customers  by  requiring  PPE  and  other  measures  without  mandating  the 
COVID-19 shots; (5) nothing has changed except the recent mandate; and (6) therefore months of 
history during COVID-19, with the Delta variant, during which COVID-19 shots were available, 
combined  with  the  health  and  safety  measures  such  as  PPE,  social  distancing,  sanitization,  air 
filtration, and implementing and virtual remote work options are reasonable accommodations that 
permitted  employers  and  employees  to  operate.  The  accommodation  request  is  to  continue  to 
permit your employees to work in the same manner without diminution as you have done for many 
months.  

In light of this very relevant past history, there are no conceivable circumstances under 
which employers can now argue that they face an undue hardship to accommodate employees with 
sincerely held religious objections to the COVID-19 vaccines. 

The Emergency Use Authorization Statute Prohibits Mandating the Currently Available 
COVID-19 Vaccines 

The United States Code provides:  

[S]ubject  to  the  provisions  of  this  section,  the Secretary  (of  the 
Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services)  may  authorize  the 
introduction into interstate commerce, during the effective period of 
a declaration under subsection (b), of a drug, device, or biological 
product  intended  for  use  in  an  actual  or  potential  emergency 
(referred to in this section as an “emergency use.” 

21 U.S.C. § 360bbb-3(a)(1) (emphasis added) [hereinafter EUA Statute]. As an essential part of 
the explicit statutory conditions for EUA, the EUA Statute mandates that all individuals to whom 
the EUA product may be administered be given the option to accept or refuse administration of 
the product. See 21 U.S.C. § 360bbb-3(e)(1)(A)(ii)(III) (requiring that “individual to whom the 
product is administered are informed . . . of the option to accept or refuse administration of the 
product” (emphasis added)). The only currently available COVID-19 vaccines (Janssen/Johnson 

Page 34 of 63

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Unlawful Conditions for Religious Exemptions 
October 6, 2021Page 7 

& Johnson, Moderna, and Pfizer-BioNTech) are only authorized for use under the EUA Statute 
and have no general approval under federal law. Thus, the administration of such vaccines cannot 
be mandatory under the plain text of the EUA Statute. 

The statutorily required Fact Sheets for each of the EUA COVID-19 vaccines acknowledge 
that individuals cannot be compelled to accept or receive the vaccine. See Moderna, Fact Sheet for 
Recipients and Caregivers (June 24, 2021), https://www.fda.gov/media/144638/download (“It is 
your choice to receive or not to receive the Moderna COVID-19 Vaccine. Should you decide 
not to receive it, it will not change your standard medical care.” (emphasis added)); Pfizer-
BioNTech, 
2021), 
https://www.fda.gov/media/144414/download (“It is your choice to receive or not to receive the 
Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 Vaccine. Should you decide not to receive it, it will not change 
your  standard  medical  care.”  (emphasis  added));  Janssen,  Fact  Sheet  for  Recipients  and 
Caregivers (July 8, 2021),  https://www.fda.gov/media/146305/download  (“It is  your choice to 
receive or not to receive the Janssen COVID-19 Vaccine. Should you decide not to receive it, 
it will not change your standard medical care.” (emphasis added)). 

and  Caregivers 

Recipients 

Sheet 

(June 

Fact 

25, 

for 

The  recent  FDA  biologics  license  application  (BLA)  approval  of  the  product 
COMIRNATY, COVID-19 Vaccine, mRNA, manufactured by BioNTech Manufacturing GmbH,3 
does  not  change  the  EUA  status  of  the  Pfizer-BioNTech  COVID-19  Vaccine  that  has  been 
available under EUA since December 23, 2020.4 According to the EUA extension letter issued by 
the FDA to Pfizer on August 23, 2021, the  Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 Vaccine and BioNTech’s 
COMIRNATY, COVID-19 Vaccine, mRNA “are legally distinct” products.5 Moreover, the now 
“approved” COMIRNATY vaccine cannot be distributed for use until BioNTech submits “final 
container samples of the product in final containers together with protocols showing results of all 
applicable tests” and BioNTech receives “a notification of release from the Director, Center for 
Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER).”6 Thus, it is not clear when (or if) any employees will 
have access to the “approved” COMIRNATY vaccine, leaving all (or at least the vast majority of) 
employees  who  elect  to  receive  the  “Pfizer”  vaccine  pursuant  to  company  mandatory  vaccine 
policy to receive a dose of the current stock of Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine still being administered 
subject to EUA rules.  

The following summarizes the current status of the Pfizer-BioNTech shots:  

1.  All  existing  Pfizer  vials  (in  the  hundreds  of  millions),  remain  under  the  federal 
Emergency Use Authorization (EUA) (meaning people have the “option to accept or 
refuse”); 

2.  The third or “booster” Pfizer shot is identical to the above and remains under the EUA 

with limited use to certain categories of people; 

BLA Approval Letter for COMIRNATY, COVID-19 Vaccine, mRNA (Aug. 23, 2021), 

EUA  Extension  Letter  for  Pfizer-BioNTech  COVID-19  Vaccine  (Aug.  23,  2021), 

3  
https://www.fda.gov/media/151710/download. 
4  
https://www.fda.gov/media/150386/download. 
5  
6  

See EUA Extension Letter, supra note 4, at 2 n.8. 
See BLA Approval Letter, supra note 3, at 2. 

Page 35 of 63

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Unlawful Conditions for Religious Exemptions 
October 6, 2021Page 8 

3.  BioNTech  received  FDA  approval  for  people  ages  16  and  above  under  the  name 

Comirnaty, but there are no Comirnaty doses available in the United States; 

4.  In other words, there is  currently NO FDA approved COVID-19 injection available 
anywhere in the United States. Every COVID shot in America remains under the EUA 
law and thus people have the “option to accept or refuse” them; and 

5.  Even  when  an  FDA  approved  COVID  shot  becomes  available,  individuals  are 
protected  by  federal  law  and  many  states  laws  from  being  forced  to  get  these  shots 
based on their sincere religious beliefs or conscience rights. 7 

Thus, under the EUA Statute, administration of the currently available vaccines cannot 
be mandatory. At any rate, even without the EUA Statute, these employees still have legal rights 
for religious accommodation under state and federal law. 

CONCLUSION 

Employers  cannot  compel  compliance  with  a  mandatory  COVID-19  vaccination  policy 
against their sincerely held religious beliefs without providing reasonable accommodation. Based 
on past history, there are no conceivable circumstances under which employers—which for months 
provided reasonable accommodations to employees—cannot now do the same. It is unlawful for 
to  deny  or  interfere  with  any  employee’s  request  for  religious  accommodation  because  other 
religious adherents have different beliefs. 

7 https://lc.org/newsroom/details/082721-fda-does-a-bait-and-switch-with-covid-shots-1 

Page 36 of 63

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA 

109 Second Street NE 

Washington, DC 20002 

Tel 202-289-1776 

Fax 407-875-0770 

LC.org 

        FLORIDA 

  PO Box 540774 

Orlando, FL 32854 

 Tel 407-875-1776 

Fax 407-875-0770 

    May 2021 

VIRGINIA 

PO Box 11108 

Lynchburg, VA 24506 

Tel 407-875-1776 

Fax 407-875-0770 

Liberty@LC.org 

Memo on COVID Vaccination Mandates 

Liberty Counsel is a national nonprofit litigation, education and public policy organization 

advancing  religious  freedom,  the  sanctity  of  human  life,  and  family.  We  have  engaged  in 

extensive litigation regarding civil rights violations ostensibly justified by “COVID-19.” We have 

had great success on behalf of our many clients at circuit courts of appeal and at the United 

States  Supreme  Court.  See,  e.g.,  Harvest  Rock  Church  v.  Newsom,  No.  20A137,  2021  WL 

406257 (U.S. Feb. 5, 2021); Harvest Rock Church v. Newsom, Gov. of CA, No. 20A94, 2020 

WL 7061630 (U.S. Dec. 3, 2020); Elim Romanian Pentecostal Church v. Pritzker, 962 F.3d 341 

(7th  Cir.  2020);  Maryville  Baptist  Church,  Inc.  v.  Beshear,  957  F.3d  610  (6th  Cir.  2020).  The 

existence  of  COVID-19  does  not  justify  the  numerous  violations  of  fundamental  individual, 

economic  and  religious  liberties.  These  include  the  rights  of  personal  autonomy  and  bodily 

integrity, and the right to accept or reject the various COVID vaccines based on religious belief 

or other grounds. 

COVID Vaccines Cannot Be Mandatory Under Emergency Use Authorization 

On the issue of the COVID vaccines: all of such have been released under an Emergency 

Use Authorization (“EUA”) and employers (religious and non-religious alike) may not condition 

continued employment on taking an EUA-authorized COVID vaccine.  

The COVID vaccines are in a special category and cannot be treated like FDA licensed 

vaccines.  None  of  the  COVID  vaccines  are  FDA  licensed;  nor  have  they  received  full  FDA 

approval. Rather, their approval is under the special provision noted above as EUA. This means 

that there is not enough data (which includes duration of testing) for the FDA to render a final 

approval.  More  importantly,  no  one,  including  private  employers,  may  coerce  individuals  (by 

threatening their employment or otherwise) to take  an EUA vaccine. Federal law requires full 

and informed, voluntary consent.   

All  employees  –  whether  employed  by  religious  organizations,  or  not  –  are  protected 

against mandated COVID-19 vaccines, under 21 U.S.C. §360bbb-3, which provides that EUA 

products (like all of these vaccines) require (as a condition of emergency approval) that people 

have “the option to accept or refuse administration of the product.” “FDA has an obligation 

to ensure that recipients of the vaccine under an EUA are informed… that they have the option 

to accept or refuse the vaccine.”1 (emphasis added). There is no exception in the statute for 

“private employers” as opposed to government; or for religious or non-religious employers. All 

EUA vaccines are optional.  

1 https://www.eeoc.gov/wysk/what-you-should-know-about-covid-19-and-ada-rehabilitation-act-and-other-eeo-laws 

Page 37 of 63

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COVID vaccination mandates 

May 11, 2021 

Page 2 

Moreover,  at  the  Centers  for  Disease  Control  Advisory  Committee  on  Immunization 

Practices (ACIP) meeting held in August 2020, CDC-ACIP Executive Secretary Amanda Cohn, 

MD  confirmed  the  non-mandatory  nature  of  an  EUA  vaccine:  “under  an  Emergency  Use 

Authorization,  an  EUA,  vaccines  are  not  allowed  to  be  mandatory.  So,  early  in  this 

vaccination phase, individuals will have to be consented and they won’t be able to be mandated.” 

(emphasis added).2 

            COVID Vaccines Cannot Be Mandatory Under Title VII 

In  general,  employee  vaccine  religious  exemption  requests  must  be  accommodated, 

where a reasonable accommodation exists without undue hardship to the employer, under Title 

VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.  

Many people hold sincere religious beliefs against taking any vaccines, or taking those 

derived from aborted fetal cell lines, or taking those sold by companies that profit from the sale 

of vaccines and other products derived from abortion.  

Title VII, as amended, prohibits two categories of employment practices. It is unlawful for 

an  employer:  “(1)  to  fail  or  refuse  to  hire  or  to  discharge  any  individual,  or  otherwise  to 

discriminate against any individual with respect to his compensation, terms, conditions, 

or privileges of employment, because of such individual’s race, color, religion, sex, or national 

origin; or (2) to limit, segregate, or classify his employees or applicants for employment in any 

way  which  would  deprive  or tend  to  deprive  any  individual  of  employment  opportunities  or 

otherwise  adversely  affect  his  status  as  an  employee,  because  of  such  individual’s  race, 

color, religion, sex, or national origin.” 42 U.S.C. § 2000e–2(a). (Emphasis added).  

By pattern and practice, virtually every employer in America has shown that reasonable 

accommodations and alternatives to  vaccination indeed  exist for  employees, and these  have 

been required all along since the inception of COVID: self-screening with temperature checks, 

wearing personal protective equipment (PPE), and complying with other safety protocols until 

the number of COVID infections work their way down to acceptable levels. Logically, if these 

measures are and were effective at preventing the spread of COVID, they will continue to be 

effective. Thus, no employer can claim an undue hardship by allowing employees to do what 

they have been doing for over a year, in the alternative to a vaccine. 

Liberty  Counsel’s  interpretation  of  Title  VII  is  also  supported  by  the  footnoted,  linked 

press  releases  from  the  Equal  Employment  Opportunity  Commission  (EEOC)3  and  the  U.S. 

Department of Justice (US DOJ).4 It is unlawful for employers to force vaccinations on staff and 

employees  holding  religious  convictions  against  a  vaccine,  and  to  refuse  a  reasonable 

accommodation.  This  goes  for  healthcare  industry  employers.  In  2018,  one  hospital  paid 

$89,000 to settle a suit after refusing to accommodate and firing employees who declined flu 

vaccinations based on their religious beliefs. US DOJ sought compensatory damages on behalf 

of a nursing home employee against whom Ozaukee County, Wisconsin discriminated. 

Singling Out Employees For Individual Questioning or Adverse Action 

Under the ADA, GINA and Title VII 

In interpreting the Americans With Disabilities Act (“ADA”), the EEOC has opined that it 

2 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=p0zCEiGohJs&list=PLvrp9iOILTQb6D9e1YZWpbUvzfptNMKx2&inde 

3 https://www1.eeoc.gov//eeoc/newsroom/release/1-12-18.cfm?renderforprint=1 

4 https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/justice-department-files-lawsuit-against-ozaukee-county-wisconsin-religious-

x=43. See Minute 1:14:40 

discrimination 

Page 38 of 63

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COVID vaccination mandates 

May 11, 2021 

Page 3 

is  improper  to  “ask  only  one  employee—as  opposed  to  asking  all  employees—questions 

designed  to  determine  if  [he]  has  COVID-19,  or  require  that  this  employee  alone  have  [his] 

temperature taken or undergo other screening or testing[.] “If an employer wishes to ask only a 

particular employee to answer such questions, or to have  [his] temperature taken or undergo 

other screening or testing, the ADA requires the employer to have a reasonable belief based on 

objective  evidence  that  this  person  might  have  the  disease.”5  EEOC  has  also  stated  that  an 

employer may not “ask an employee who is physically coming into the workplace whether 

they have family members who have COVID-19 or symptoms associated with COVID-19,” 

as such is a violation of the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act (GINA). 6   

The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has also recognized that 

there is “not evidence that COVID-19 vaccines prevent transmission of the virus from 

person-to-person,” and reiterated that employers should not improperly distinguish between 

employees. 7 (Emphasis added). “The most effective COVID-19 prevention programs … include the 

following elements:”  

15. Not distinguishing between workers who are vaccinated and those who 

are not: Workers who are vaccinated must continue to follow protective measures, 

such as wearing a face covering and remaining physically distant, because at this 

time,  there  is  not  evidence  that  COVID-19  vaccines  prevent  transmission  of  the 

virus  from  person-to-person.  The CDC  explains that  experts  need  to  understand 

more  about  the  protection  that  COVID-19  vaccines  provide  before  deciding  to 

change recommendations on steps everyone should take to slow the spread of the 

virus that causes COVID-19.8 (Emphasis original and added). 

On  May  22,  2021,  OSHA’s  reversed  the  following  guidance  regarding  whether  adverse 

reactions experienced by employees who take the shot under certain conditions or arrangements 

are recordable on OSHA’s recordkeeping log9: 

If I require my employees to take the COVID-19 vaccine as a condition of their 

employment, are adverse reactions to the vaccine recordable? 

If you require your employees to be vaccinated as a condition of employment (i.e., 

for work-related reasons), then any adverse reaction to the COVID-19 vaccine 

is work-related. The adverse reaction is recordable if it is a new case under 29 

CFR 1904.6 and meets one or more of the general recording criteria  in 29 CFR 

1904.7.10 (Emphasis added). 

I do not require my employees to get the COVID-19 vaccine. However, I do 

recommend that they receive the vaccine and may provide it to them or make 

arrangements for them to receive it offsite. If an employee has an adverse 

reaction to the vaccine, am I required to record it? 

No.  Although  adverse  reactions  to  recommended  COVID-19  vaccines  may  be 

recordable under 29 CFR 1904.4(a) if the reaction is: (1) work-related, (2) a new 

case, and (3) meets one or more of the general recording criteria in 29 CFR 1904.7, 

OSHA  is  exercising  its  enforcement  discretion  to  only  require  the  recording  of 

adverse effects to required vaccines at this time. Therefore, you do not need to 

record adverse effects from COVID-19 vaccines that you recommend, but do 

5 https://www.eeoc.gov/wysk/what-you-should-know-about-covid-19-and-ada-rehabilitation-act-and-other-eeo-laws  

6 Id. 

8  Id. 

7 https://www.osha.gov/coronavirus/safework#role-employers-workers  

9 https://www.osha.gov/coronavirus/faqs#worker  

10 https://www.osha.gov/coronavirus/faqs#vaccine  

Page 39 of 63

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COVID vaccination mandates 

May 11, 2021 

Page 4 

not require. (Emphasis added). 

Note that for this discretion to apply, the vaccine must be truly voluntary. For 

example, an employee’s choice to accept or reject the vaccine cannot affect their 

performance rating or professional advancement. An employee who chooses not 

to  receive  the  vaccine  cannot  suffer  any  repercussions  from  this  choice.  If 

employees  are  not  free  to  choose  whether  or  not  to  receive  the  vaccine 

without 

fearing  adverse  action, 

then 

the  vaccine 

is  not  merely 

“recommended” and employers should consult the above FAQ regarding COVID-

19 vaccines that are a condition of employment. (Emphasis added).11 

On May 22, 2021, OSHA’s updated FAQ stated as follows: 

Are  adverse  reactions  to  the  COVID-19  vaccine  recordable  on  the  OSHA 

recordkeeping log? 

DOL  and  OSHA,  as  well  as  other  federal  agencies,  are  working  diligently  to 

encourage COVID-19 vaccinations. OSHA does not wish to have any appearance 

of discouraging workers from receiving COVID-19 vaccination, and also does not 

wish  to  disincentivize  employers’  vaccination  efforts.  As  a  result,  OSHA  will  not 

enforce 29 CFR 1904’s recording requirements to require any employers to record 

worker  side  effects  from  COVID-19  vaccination  through  May  2022.  We  will 

reevaluate the agency’s position at that time to determine the best course of action 

moving forward.12 

Finally,  questioning  employees  (much  less  taking  adverse  employment  action  against 

them) on the basis of church membership or church attendance potentially violates not only the 

ADA,  but  also  Title  VII,  which  prohibits  discrimination  based  on  religious  worship  or  religious 

practices engaged in by the employee outside the workplace. 

Conclusion 

There  are  strong  protections  under  federal  law  for  persons  who  wish  to  decline  the 

current EUA-authorized COVID vaccines. Neither government nor private employers may force 

anyone to receive any of the COVID injections.  

11 Id. 

12 https://www.osha.gov/coronavirus/faqs#collapse-vaccine  

Page 40 of 63

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Japan drops vax rollout, goes to Ivermectin, ENDS COVID 

almost overnight  

27 October 2021 

The ongoing COVID-19 nonsense here in the United States exists solely and exclusively because 

our governments have failed to use the correct treatment.  They used so-called "vaccines" when 

Japan has just proven, in less than ONE MONTH, that Ivermectin can wipe out the disease. 

Sweden's Public Health Agency on Wednesday recommended a temporary halt to the use of the 

Moderna COVID-19 vaccine among young adults, citing concerns over rare side effects to the 

heart. It said the pause should initially be in force until December 1, explaining that it had 

received evidence of an increased risk of side effects such as inflammation of the heart muscle 

(myocarditis) and inflammation of the pericardium (pericarditis). {link to CBS News (Secure)] 

Finland, Denmark and Norway have also moved away from the COVID vaccines.  

Finland last Thursday joined Sweden, Denmark and Norway in recommending against use 

of Moderna Inc.’s Covid-19 vaccine in younger age groups, citing risks of rare cardiovascular 

side effects they said warranted the precautionary steps. 

Finland’s Institute for Health and Welfare said last Thursday it would pause use of the Moderna 

vaccine among men under the age of 30, following a similar step last Wednesday by Swedish 

regulators. Denmark last Wednesday said it wouldn’t offer the Moderna vaccine to under-18s as 

a precautionary measure. 

Norway on Wednesday advised that all under-18s shouldn’t be given the Moderna vaccine, 

even if they had already received one dose, and recommended that men under 30 consider 

getting the vaccine developed by Pfizer Inc. and BioNTech instead. Norwegian officials cited 

U.S., Canadian and Nordic data, saying the absolute risks remain low and calling the advice “a 

precautionary measure.” 

The European Medicines Agency said Thursday that new preliminary data from the Nordic 

countries supports a warning the agency adopted in July that inflammatory heart conditions 

called myocarditis and pericarditis can occur in very rare cases following vaccination with 

Covid-19 shots made by Moderna and Pfizer-BioNTech. 

By far, however, the absolute superstar among foreign nations dealing with COVID is 

Japan.  Japan has PULLED the vaccines and substituted Ivermectin - and in one month, wiped 

COVID out in that country! 

* Safe? Japan pulls Moderna vax, ends nationwide vax drive after “magnetic” “metals” found to 

contaminate jabs: [link to asia.nikkei.com (secure)] 

* Three lots of Moderna jabs recalled in Japan over stainless steel contamination: [link to 

Page 41 of 63

 
them. 

Ivermectin. 

Get it? 

Understand? 

disappears. 

www.rt.com (secure)] 

(secure)] 

* Several Japanese cities report white stuff floating in jab vials: [link to www.zerohedge.com 

* Japan minister of health tells docs to recommend IVM: [link to rclutz.com (secure)] 

* Japan now a MAJOR SUCCESS STORY after it BEATS COVID rapidly: [link to 

www.msn.com (secure)] 

Any questions? 

 Just so you understand the timeline. 

By September deaths from the COVID-19 Vaccine jabs were being investigated. 

At roughly that time, the vials were under scrutiny and metal "magnetic" material was found in 

Very shortly thereafter, the Japanese minister of health announced doctors could prescribe 

A month later, the Western press is shocked that COVID has all but disappeared from the island. 

This is what it looks like in a country that still has rule of law. The governemnt responds to 

reports of death and contaminated vaxes, moves to real treatment, people get better, and the virus 

Now compare that to what is happening in the United States and in Australia and New 

Zealand.  All three countries are in dismal failure in their handling of COVID-19, and that failure 

has resulted in staggering loss of freedom and destruction of commerce. 

 This is the biggest news story right now. 

Japan has ended COVID. It did it after it stopped the vax rollout and went to Ivermectin. 

Period. Hard stop. 

Editorial Opinion 

did. 

If your government really wanted to end COVID, if that was its true goal, it would do what Japan 

Page 42 of 63

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
You can use Japan as a case study any time someone starts yammering some crap about how the 

vax is about helping you help yourself from getting others sick with what they've been vaxed 

against. 

You use it as a case study when they try to make some lame argument about how the government 

is really really really trying its best to end COVID and it is the MAGA crowd that is causing the 

variants and keeping the virus around. 

Japan stopped vaxing.  Japan went to IVM.  Japan is COVID-free. It did it in less than a month! 

 So if your government won't do what Japan did, now that JAPAN HAS BEAT COVID, what 

does it say about your government? 

It says the conspiracy theorists were right! They were right. It is a damning conviction of the 

narrative that the government is somehow a benevolent force against you getting viruses. 

No, because we now have historic precedent of a government doing the right thing and getting 

the WIN. 

good. 

If your government won't do it, it is because the vax is about something other than the public 

Japan got started vaxing later, and quit earlier than Massachusetts. Massachusetts is still fighting 

COVID with a couple thousand breakthrough cases per week. Japan is done. 

Page 43 of 63

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COVID Vaccine 

Legal Memo on COVID Vaccination Mandates 

Index: 

•  Community Health Ambassadors—Door Knocking Project 

•  Adverse Reactions and Deaths 

•  Blood Clots and Cardiovascular 

•  Breakthrough Cases 

•  CDC and FDA 

•  Children 18 and under Survival Rate 

•  Clinical Trials 

•  COVID 

Emergency Use Authorization 

Fauci, Anthony, M.D. 

•  Gates, Bill 

•  Graphine Oxide, Magnets and DNA 

•  H1N1 Swine Flu 

•  HCQ 

Ivermectin 

Legal Memo for Work and School 

•  mRNA Technology 

•  Masks 

•  Media Suppression 

•  Media with Mat Staver 

•  Miscellaneous News Articles 

•  Natural Immunity 

Personal Stories of Adverse Reactions 

Press Releases—Liberty Counsel 

•  Resources—Other 

•  Risks and Warnings 

Spike Protein and Affected Body Organs 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Spions 

State Laws 

Treatments 

Transmission of Adverse Reactions from COVID Shot 

•  Vaccine Development 

•  Vaccines 

•  Vaccines—Other 

•  Vaccine Passports and Contact Tracing 

•  Wuhan Institute of Virology 

Covid Vaccine Details 

Adverse Reactions and Deaths 

Page 44 of 63

 
 
 
•  Detroit News Station’s Appeal For Stories About Unvaccinated Loved Ones Dying of COVID Gets an 

•  C19 Vax Reactions  

o  Real Medical Observations 

o  Real Testimonies 

o  Real Video Stories 

o 

Studies, Reactions and Correspondence 

o  Q&A Interviews 

•  COVID-19 Data Collection, Morbidity & Federal Law 

•  COVID Injury Social Media Tracking 

•  COVID GLOBAL Stats - RealTime 

Unexpected Response  

o  Facebook Post 

EU drug safety database 

Drug Reactions for COVID-19 Shots (July 2021) 

Adverse Drug Reactions (September 2021) 

FDA Presentation on COVID Shots Oct 2020  

Death) 

o  PowerPoint Presentation 

o  Full Video Presentation 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

EU - 18,928 DEAD, 1.8 Million Injured (50% SERIOUS) Reported in European Union’s Database of Adverse 

EU - 24,526 Deaths 2,317,495 Injuries Following COVID Shots Reported In European Union’s Database Of 

o  FDA Accidentally Reveals List Of Covid Vaccine Side Effects (Myocarditis, Autoimmune Disease & 

SCREEN SHOT: FDA slide on COVID Shots Adverse Reactions Oct 2020 (Steven Anderson) (2 hour 

33 minute approx. 40 second mark, don't blink) 

• 

Israel's Adverse Reactions  

IPC Finds Catastrophic Side Effects Of Pfizer Vaccine To Every System In Human Body  

▪  Report of Adverse Events Related to the Corona Vaccine, April 2021: Never has a vaccine 

o 

o 

o 

injured so many. 

Israel testimonies on adverse reactions and deaths from Pfizer shots 

Jeremy Chardy: I regret getting vaccinated, I have series of problems now 

Jessica Berg Wilson: 1983 - 2021 

Lisa Shaw: Presenter's death due to complications of Covid vaccine 

Pharmaceutical Researcher Addresses Cardiovascular Adverse Reactions 

Safety of COVID-19 Vaccinations—We Should Rethink the Policy  

o  The number of cases experiencing adverse reactions has been reported to be 700 per 100,000 

vaccinations. Currently, we see 16 serious side effects per 100,000 vaccinations, and the number 

of fatal side effects is at 4.11/100,000 vaccinations. For three deaths prevented by vaccination we 

have to accept two inflicted by vaccination. Conclusions: This lack of clear benefit should cause 

governments to rethink their vaccination policy. 

Sen. Johnson Press Conference Featuring Personal Testimonies 

Testimonies & Reports—First-Hand 

•  VAERS Data Chart 

•  VAERS—Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System 

•  Vaccine Deaths—Independent Fact-Based Public Education Website 

•  Vaccine side effects shown at a FDA presentation in 2020 

•  U.K.'s Evidence-Based Medicine Consultancy Ltd. Study — Yellow Card System: "COVID-19 vaccines unsafe 

•  U.S. reviewing if Moderna shot tied to higher heart inflammation risk - Washington Post 

for use in humans" 

• 

Yellow Card data report 

Page 45 of 63

 
News Articles 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

3 Dozen Cases of Spontaneous Miscarriages, Stillbirths Occurring After COVID-19 Vaccination 

13-Year-Old Dies in Sleep After Receiving Pfizer COVID Vaccine; CDC Investigating 

27-Year-Old Resident Doctor Dies Months After Receiving COVID Vaccine 

35-Year-Old Woman Dies of Brain Hemorrhage 11 Days After Receiving J&J Vaccine 

39-Year-Old Healthy Utah Mother Dies After Taking Second Dose of Moderna Vaccine 

246 'fully vaccinated' Michigan residents get COVID-19, three die: report 

501 deaths + 10,748 other injuries reported following COVID vaccine, latest CDC data show 

5,800 Fully Vaccinated Americans Have Contracted COVID-19, 74 Dead: CDC 

•  At Least 18 Cases of Apparent Heart Problems in Young People in CT After COVID-19 Vaccine 

•  At Least 55 People in USA Have Died After Receiving COVID Vaccine - Faith & Freedom 

•  At least 271 deaths, 9,845 adverse events after COVID vaccination so far: CDC data 

•  Australian Woman’s Death Linked to COVID-19 Jab 

•  Breastfeeding Baby Dies After Mother Receives Pfizer Vaccine 

•  CDC: 10 life-threatening reactions linked with Moderna COVID-19 vaccine 

•  CDC Investigating Death of 13-Year-Old Who Suddenly Died After Second Coronavirus Shot 

•  CDC investigating reports of 'mild' heart problems in young COVID vaccine recipients 

•  CDC Panel Signals Support for Booster Shots, as Reports of Injuries, Deaths After COVID Vaccines Near 

500,000 

vaccines 

•  COVID Vaccine Injury Reports Among 12- to 17-Year-Olds More Than Triple in 1 Week 

•  Doctor dies and 36 others ‘develop rare blood disorder after getting Moderna and Pfizer Covid 

•  Doctors for COVID Ethics: Halt Use of Pfizer COVID Vaccines in Adolescents ‘Immediately’ 

FDA to Add Warning About Neurological Disorder Linked to Johnson & Johnson COVID-19 Vaccine 

Federal Government-Vax deaths have been covered up 

Fully Vaccinated Person Dies of COVID-19 in Texas, Officials Say 

•  Grandmother dies within hours of receiving COVID vaccine 

•  Healthcare worker dies after second dose of COVID vaccine 

•  Heart Reaction Probed as Possible Rare Vaccine Link in Teens 

•  Henry County teacher dies from COVID-19 months after getting vaccine 

•  Hopkins Doctors Create Rapid Blood Test to Confirm COVID Vaccination 

Immunologist advises nuns who lost three sisters after getting COVID vaccine to avoid second dose 

Investigation into Florida doctor who died two weeks after COVID-19 vaccine 

•  MIS-C, A Rare COVID-19 Complication 

•  Moderna vaccine causing "COVID arm" among some patients 

•  Nuns die after taking first shot of COVID vaccine 

•  Nursing Homes: Almost half of US COVID-19 deaths are linked to nursing homes 

•  Nursing Home Deaths following Covid-19 vaccine across the globe 

•  Our First Hand ICU Story - What is ACTUALLY Killing People In The Hospital 

•  Rare vaccine injury claims steered to obscure federal office 

Seniors Dying After COVID Vaccine Labeled as Natural Causes 

Son Was a Healthy Athlete — Now He Can ‘Barely Walk,’ Mom Says  

o  Teen Hospitalized With Blood Clots in Brain After First Dose of Pfizer Vaccine 

o  Tucker Carlson interviews Mom of 17 year old - Blood Clots in Brain 

Surgeon who operated on young Italian vaccine victim: 'You have never seen anything like this' 

Teen dies of heart attack soon after getting COVID shot so he could play hockey: report 

•  VAERS Data Show Vaccine Injury Trends Continue 

•  Victims of the COVID Vaccine 

•  Ways the Vaccine Will Harm Your Health - Dr. Mercola 

Page 46 of 63

•  Woman Losing Hands and Legs to Amputation After Suspected Bad COVID Vaccine Reaction 

Blood Clots and Cardiovascular 

• 

35-Year-Old Woman Dies of Brain Hemorrhage 11 Days After Receiving J&J Vaccine 

•  At Least 18 Cases of Apparent Heart Problems in Young People in CT After COVID-19 Vaccine 

•  Boys more at risk from Pfizer jab side-effect than Covid, suggests study  

o 

STUDY: Ages 12-17: A Stratified National Database Analysis 

•  CDC Finds More Clotting Cases After J&J Vaccine, Sees Causal Link 

•  CDC investigating reports of 'mild' heart problems in young COVID vaccine recipients 

•  CDC panel says data suggests 'likely' link between COVID-19 mRNA vaccines, rare heart issues in teens  

•  CDC: Rare heart inflammation cases linked to Pfizer, Moderna vaccines 

•  CDC says - Covid vaccine link to heart issue 

•  Clear link between AstraZeneca and rare blood clots 

•  Comparison of adverse drug reactions among four COVID-19 vaccines in Europe using the EudraVigilance 

database: Thrombosis at unusual sites (blood clots in brain) 

•  Doctor dies and 36 others ‘develop rare blood disorder after getting Moderna and Pfizer Covid vaccines 

•  DoD Confirms: Rare Heart Inflammation Cases Linked to COVID-19 Vaccines 

FDA adds warning about rare heart inflammation to Pfizer, Moderna Covid vaccines 

FDA recommends pause of Johnson & Johnson COVID-19 vaccine after blood clot cases 

•  Heart Inflammation Linked to COVID Vaccines in Study of U.S. Military, Department of Defense Confirms 

•  Heart Reaction Probed as Possible Rare Vaccine Link in Teens 

•  How the Spike Protein Hurts the Heart 

Immunization with SARS coronavirus vaccines leads to pulmonary immunopathology on challenge with the 

SARS virus—PubMed.gov 

Israel sees probable link between Pfizer vaccine and myocarditis cases 

•  Nearly 800 Reports of Heart Inflammation After COVID-19 Vaccination in US 

•  New Study Links "Acute Chest Pain" In Male Soldiers To mRNA Vaccines 

•  Military Members are Dying and Suffering Crippling Effects from COVID Vaccinations 

•  Myocarditis after COVID-19 vaccination higher in military population than expected, study finds 

•  Myocarditis Following Immunization With mRNA COVID-19 Vaccines in Members of the US Military 

•  Overview of Myocarditis and Pericarditis 

Pharmaceutical Researcher Addresses Cardiovascular Adverse Reactions 

Services Will Make Call on Religious Exemptions to COVID-19 Vaccines 

Son Was a Healthy Athlete — Now He Can ‘Barely Walk,’ Mom Says  

o  Teen Hospitalized With Blood Clots in Brain After First Dose of Pfizer Vaccine 

o  Tucker Carlson interviews Mom of 17 year old - Blood Clots in Brain 

Teen dies of heart attack soon after getting COVID shot so he could play hockey: report 

•  Visual Display of How mRNA Vaccine Affects Cells 

Breakthrough Cases 

3,791 Fully Vaccinated People in Massachusetts Test Positive for COVID-19 

4,115 Vaccinated People Have Died or Been Hospitalized With COVID-19 ‘Breakthrough’ Infections: CDC 

50% Of Vaccinated Adults In Britain Infected With Corona 

5,800 Fully Vaccinated Americans Have Contracted COVID-19, 74 Dead: CDC 

9,969 Fully Vaccinated People Contract COVID-19 In Massachusetts, 106 Dead 

•  A grim warning from Israel: Vaccination blunts, but does not defeat Delta 

•  A leading US disease expert says there's 'no doubt in my mind' that vaccinated people are helping spread 

Delta 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Page 47 of 63

•  Can vaccinated folks carry the new variants of COVID-19? — Good Morning America — "breakthrough 

cases are so common we can't really call them breakthrough" 

•  CDC analysis shows 74% of Provincetown cases occurred in vaccinated individuals 

•  CDC Report on Breakthrough Cases 

•  CDC group weighs Covid booster shots for immunocompromised people at higher risk of breakthrough 

•  Cases in UK 

infections 

•  COVID-19 Vaccine Breakthrough Case Investigation and Reporting 

•  COVID-19 increases in vaccinated—Israel Population (website-translation needed) 

•  Covid outbreak among vaccinated Vegas hospital workers underscores Delta risks 

•  Delta infection: Unvaccinated and vaccinated people have similar levels of virus 

•  Despite 95% vaccination rate, Cornell today has five times more COVID cases than it did this time last year 

•  Dr. Harvey Risch: 60% of new COVID cases are people who have been vaccinated 

Evidence mounts that people with breakthrough infections can spread Delta easily 

Former CDC Director Gives Alarming Statistic on Fully Vaccinated COVID Deaths 

Fueled by Delta variant, COVID resurgence races across Israel 

Fully vaccinated people with "breakthrough" COVID Delta infections carry as much virus as the 

unvaccinated 

Fully Vaccinated 21-Year-Old Student Dies of COVID-19 

Fully Vaccinated Person Dies of COVID-19 in Texas, Officials Say 

•  Global Coronavirus Statistics 

Is Israel or the UK right when it comes to COVID-19 vaccine effectiveness? 

ISRAEL PM - the vaccines last 6 months, then you will require a booster—Unvaccinated less at risk than 

those with 2 doses 

•  Maine says 8 vaccinated residents died 'with COVID-19' 

•  Most Covid patients in East Lancashire hospital had jab, says council leader 

•  Official data reveals 67% of Covid-19 deaths since February 2021 have been people who were vaccinated 

•  Ontario - More hospitalizations due to suspected adverse events among vaccinated 

Psaki confirms more breakthrough COVID cases in White House that were not disclosed 

Study: Fully Vaccinated Healthcare Workers Carry 251 Times Viral Load, Pose Threat to Unvaccinated 

Patients, Co-Workers 

Cases in San Francisco Bay Area  

There It Is – Study Finds Predominance of Antibody-Resistant SARS-CoV-2 Variants in Vaccine Breakthrough 

o 

STUDY: Predominance of antibody-resistant SARS-CoV-2 variants in vaccine breakthrough cases 

from the San Francisco Bay Area, California 

Transmission of SARS-CoV-2 Delta Variant Among Vaccinated Healthcare Workers, Vietnam 

•  Vaccinated people can carry as much virus as others 

The vaccine doesn’t stop the delta variant, according to Israel 

Yale public health professor suggests 60% of new COVID-19 patients have received vaccine 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

CDC Changes Reporting 

•  Caught Red-Handed: CDC Changes Test Thresholds To Virtually Eliminate New COVID Cases Among Vaxx'd 

•  CDC transitions reporting (screenshot) 

•  CDC Limits Review of Vaccinated but Infected; Draws Concern 

•  COVID-19 Vaccine Breakthrough Case Investigation and Reporting 

•  Why CDC Changed Its 'Breakthrough Case' Definition 

Page 48 of 63

 
CDC | FDA | WHO 

• 

• 

501 deaths + 10,748 other injuries reported following COVID vaccine, latest CDC data show 

5,800 Fully Vaccinated Americans Have Contracted COVID-19, 74 Dead: CDC 

•  Can You Trust the CDC Regarding Pregnancy 

•  CDC: 10 life-threatening reactions linked with Moderna COVID-19 vaccine 

•  CDC Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (Transcript) 

•  CDC analysis shows 74% of Provincetown cases occurred in vaccinated individuals 

•  CDC changes definition of "vaccines" to fit Covid-19 vaccine limitations 

•  CDC Director: Vaccine Passports ‘May Very Well Be a Path Forward’ in US 

•  CDC Director: There is an ‘increased risk of severe disease among those vaccinated early’ 

•  CDC Director with an Interesting Update 

•  CDC finally pulling PCR tests as they can’t differentiate between Covid and the Flu... 

•  CDC Finds More Clotting Cases After J&J Vaccine, Sees Causal Link 

•  CDC group weighs Covid booster shots for immunocompromised people at higher risk of breakthrough 

•  CDC investigating reports of 'mild' heart problems in young COVID vaccine recipients 

•  CDC Isolation Camps (PDF) 

•  CDC panel says data suggests 'likely' link between COVID-19 mRNA vaccines, rare heart issues in teens  

•  CDC Panel Signals Support for Booster Shots, as Reports of Injuries, Deaths After COVID Vaccines Near 

infections 

500,000 

•  CDC: Rare heart inflammation cases linked to Pfizer, Moderna vaccines 

•  CDC Report on Breakthrough Cases 

•  CDC says - Covid vaccine link to heart issue 

•  CDC Warned to Halt COVID Shots 

•  CDC warns Covid-19 vaccines might not protect people who are immunocompromised 

•  Changes to CDC RT-PCR for SARS-CoV-2 Testing 

FDA Does a Bait and Switch with COVID Shots - LC PR 

FDA Presentation on COVID Shots Oct 2020  

o  FDA Accidentally Reveals List Of Covid Vaccine Side Effects (Myocarditis, Autoimmune Disease & 

Death) 

o  PowerPoint Presentation 

o  Full Video Presentation 

o 

SCREEN SHOT: FDA slide on COVID Shots Adverse Reactions Oct 2020 (Steven Anderson) (2 hour 

33 minute approx. 40 second mark, don't blink) 

FDA to Add Warning About Neurological Disorder Linked to Johnson & Johnson COVID-19 Vaccine 

FDA adds warning about rare heart inflammation to Pfizer, Moderna Covid vaccines 

FDA recommends pause of Johnson & Johnson COVID-19 vaccine after blood clot cases 

Joint CDC and FDA Statement on Vaccine Boosters 

Joint CDC and FDA Statement on Johnson & Johnson COVID-19 Vaccine 

•  One-Third Of New Drugs Had Safety Problems After FDA Approval 

Stunner! Expert says 'FDA-approved' Pfizer shot is NOT what people have been getting 

Two FDA officials quit in protest over COVID vaccine reviews 

Two Senior FDA Officials Stepping Down Over Reported Disagreements With White House Over Booster 

Shots 

•  Vaccine side effects shown at a FDA presentation in 2020 

•  WHO: Third COVID-19 vaccine unnecessary 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Page 49 of 63

 
 
 
CDC Changes in Tracking Breakthrough Cases 

•  Caught Red-Handed: CDC Changes Test Thresholds To Virtually Eliminate New COVID Cases Among Vaxx'd 

•  CDC transitions reporting (screenshot) 

•  CDC Limits Review of Vaccinated but Infected; Draws Concern 

•  COVID-19 Vaccine Breakthrough Case Investigation and Reporting 

•  Why CDC Changed Its 'Breakthrough Case' Definition 

Children 18 and under Survival Rate 

•  Children Are Safe From COVID-19 

•  Risk of Covid-19 Death or Serious Illness Remains Extremely Low, New Studies... 

• 

Young kids are at low COVID risk in schools, but masking them could do long-term damage 

Clinical Trials 

•  Moderna Clinical Trials (Notice the number of participants and end dates for all three trials.)  

o  Moderna Clinical Trial - Part 1 (*Exclusion Criteria excludes pregnant women) 

o  Moderna Clinical Trial - Part 2 

o  Moderna Clinical Trial - Part 3 

•  Moderna Begins COVID-19 Vaccine Trials for Infants and Children 

•  COVID-19 Vaccine Tested on Babies and Pregnant Women 

Covid 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

•  Dr. Dan Stock—The Futility of Mask Mandates and Covid-19 Protocols (Article | Video)  

o 

Studies 

•  CDC finally pulling PCR tests as they can’t differentiate between Covid and the Flu... 

•  Covid Booster Shots May Be Needed By The Fall, Says Former FDA Head 

•  COVID Informational Video 

•  CDC Isolation Camps (PDF) 

Funeral Directer John O’Looney Blows the Whistle on Covid 

•  Global Coronavirus Statistics 

'The great war on COVID is coming to an end' 

•  Health Ministry says COVID vaccine is only 40% effective at halting transmission 

Interview on COVID 

•  New data on coronavirus vaccine effectiveness may be "a wakeup call" 

Physicians who post COVID-19 vaccine misinformation may lose license, medical panel says 

•  Recovered COVID-19 Patients Possess Robust Immunity To Virus 

Some Vaccines Last a Lifetime. Here’s Why Covid-19 Shots Don’t. 

•  US Physicians will now lose their medical license for reporting vaccine injuries and providing informed 

•  Over 3,000 Doctors and Scientists Sign Declaration Accusing COVID Policy-Makers of ‘Crimes Against 

consent to patients 

Humanity’ 

• 

Project Veritas  

o  COVID-19 Vaccine—EXPOSED Part 1 — Federal Government Whistleblower 

o  COVID-19 Vaccine—EXPOSED Part 2 — FDA Official: "Blow Dart" African Americans 

o  COVID-19 Vaccine—EXPOSED Part 3 — Johnson & Johnson: Children Don't Need the 'F***ing' 

COVID Vaccine Because... 

Page 50 of 63

 
Emergency Use Authorization 

•  COVID EUA Shots in USAEUA Law  

o 

Johnson & Johnson 

o  Moderna 

o  Pfizer/BioNTech  

▪ 

Track Record 

• 

Legal Memo 

H1N1 Swine Flu 

• 

60 minutes Program 

•  Disease Mitigation Measures in the Control of Pandemic Influenza 

•  How a Free Society Deals with Pandemics 

Legal Memo for Work and School 

• 

EEOC Guidance  

o 

Liberty Counsel Press Release 

▪ 

▪ 

Employers Face Liability by Requiring COVID Shots 

Experimental COVID Shots Cannot Be Mandated 

• 

Legal Memo  

o  ADA, Rehabilitation Act, and other EEO Laws 

o  Notice for EUA Masks 

o  Notice for EUA Testing 

o  Notice for EUA Vaccines 

•  OSHA Guidance 

mRNA Technology 

•  COVID-19 RNA Based Vaccines and the Risk of Prion Disease 

•  COVID-19 'Vaccines' Are Gene Therapy 

•  How to Neutralize Potential Damage from mRNA Vaccines 

•  mRNA Vaccines, HIV, COVID and Treatments - Dr. Tenpenny & Dr. Flemming 

•  Nobel Prize Winner—Warns Covid Vaccine May Lead to 'Neurodegenerative Illness' 

•  RNA editing alterations define manifestation of prion diseases (PDF) 

•  Worse Than the Disease? Reviewing Some Possible Unintended Consequences of the mRNA Vaccines 

Against COVID-19 

Graphine Oxide, Magnets and DNA 

•  Connection between graphene oxide and electromagnetic fields 

• 

Expert Pharmaceutical Researcher—Scientific Proof 

•  Graphene Oxide Appendix (toxicity and cytotoxicity) 

•  Magnetism  

o 

La Quinta Columna 

o  Telegram Channel 

o  Videos of people becoming magnetic 

•  Magnetofection 

Page 51 of 63

 
•  Magnetofection--a highly efficient tool for antisense oligonucleotide delivery in vitro and in vivo 

•  Magnetofection based on superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticle-mediated... 

• 

Superparamagnetic nanoparticle delivery of DNA vaccine 

•  Using magnetic force to enhance immune response to DNA vaccine 

Superparamagnetic Iron Oxide Nanoparticle 

Superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles alter expression of obesity and T2D-associated risk genes 

in human adipocytes  

o 

“Because of their very small size, nanoparticles (NPs) are capable of entering the human 

body by inhalation, ingestion, skin penetration or via injections; in this case, it may be 

assumed that NPs have capability to interact with intracellular structures and 

macromolecules for long periods. One particularly important toxicological endpoint is 

genotoxicity, as large-scale gene expression analysis provides a logical approach to study the 

detailed mechanisms of NPs toxicity. Recent studies have shown that NPs can changes gene 

expression, thus, altering cellular functions or even NPs could be the cause of toxicity.” 

• 

Superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles (SPIONs): synthesis and surface modification techniques 

1981: Surgeon’s medical mask study concludes, “minimum contamination can best be achieved by not 

wearing a mask at all” 

•  COVID Mask Misinformation 

27 States Abandon Universal Masking in School, Representing 51% of U.S. Students 

•  Do Masks Work? Viral immunologist Dr. Byram Bridle performs a simple experiment 

•  Dr. Dan Stock—The Futility of Mask Mandates and Covid-19 Protocols (Article | Video)  

o 

Studies 

Experimental Assessment of Carbon Dioxide Content in... 

Facemasks in the COVID-19 era: A health hypothesis 

Facemasks are Ineffective to Block Transmission of COVID-19 and Actually Can Cause Health Deterioration 

and Premature Death 

Florida assessed how counties that didn't have mask mandates performed 

•  Masks-for-all for COVID-19 not based on sound data 

•  Masks and Respirators do NOT Prevent Transmission of Viruses 

•  Notice for EUA Masks 

Parents Sent Their Kids' Face Masks to A Lab for Analysis 

•  Respiratory consequences of N95-type Mask usage 

Young kids are at low COVID risk in schools, but masking them could do long-term damage 

Spions 

• 

• 

Masks 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Media Suppression 

Leaked documents reveal the special rules Facebook uses for 5.8M VIPs 

Twitter launches new process for reporting COVID misinformation 

YouTube Bans All ‘Harmful Vaccine Content’ From Its Platform 

Media with Mat Staver 

•  Dr. Simone Gold 

•  Dr. Peter McCullough on Faith & Freedom  

Page 52 of 63

o  Cutting Through COVID Shot Rhetoric 

o  Are COVID Shots Really Safe? 

o  The Censored Truth of COVID Shots 

o  COVID Shot Clinical Trial Results Exposed 

o  Effective COVID Treatments 

o  Forced Injections Are a Serious Threat to Our Freedom 

•  Dr. Lee Merritt 

•  Mat Staver on Faith & Freedom  

o  Pressure for Mandatory Injections Continues to Mount 

o  The DOJ Memo is Absurd - COVID Shot Mandate Violates Federal Law 

o  COVID Shot Mandates Violate the Nuremburg Code 

•  Mat Staver on Freedom Alive!™  

o  Dangers of Vaccine Passports (Part 1) 

o  Dangers of Vaccine Passports (Part 2) 

•  Dr. Michael Yeadon 

• 

Steve Deace - What Can You Do to Push Back Against Covidstan? 

•  Dr. Vladimir Zelenko on Faith & Freedom  

o  Meet the Doctor Who First Developed Therapeutics for COVID Virus 

o  Are COVID Shots Really Safe and Effective? 

o  Veiled Truth Behind COVID Shots 

o  What to Do If You’ve Gotten the COVID Shot 

o  COVID and the Broader Spiritual Issues 

Press Releases 

•  Biden Plans to Coerce People Door to Door - 7/7 

•  COVID Shot Mandates and the Nuremberg Code - 7/30 

•  Dental School Grants Religious Exemptions for "Vaccine" Policy - 7/13 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

•  DOD Dishonors Our Soldiers - 8/9 

•  DOJ’s COVID Shot Mandate Memo Is Absurd - 7/29 

Employers Face Liability by Requiring COVID Shots - 5/14 

Experimental COVID Shots Cannot Be Mandated - 3/9 

FDA Does a Bait and Switch with COVID Shots - 8/27 

Florida Leads the Way in Freedom - 5/4 

IL School District Reverses “Vaccine” Policy - 4/16 

Indiana Students Granted Religious Exemptions Against Shots - 8/13 

LSU Dental School Reverses “Vaccine” Policy - 5/25 

•  Michigan Hospital Reverses “Vaccine” Visitation Policy - 5/5 

•  More Victories Against Loyola’s Unlawful Shot Mandate - 8/11 

•  Oregon Pushes Freedom-Killing Vaccine Passports - 5/25 

•  OSHA Suspends Reporting Adverse COVID Shot Reactions - 5/24 

States Fight Back Against Vaccine Passports - 4/22 

Students Score Victory Against Loyola’s Shot Mandate - 8/5 

•  Unlawful Shot Mandates Threaten Flight Travel - 8/12 

•  VA COVID Shot Mandate Violates the Law - 7/27 

Page 53 of 63

 
 
 
• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Miscellaneous News Articles 

From Air Travel 

4 British Airways Pilots DEAD Following COVID-19 Injections While Spain and Russia Prohibit “Vaccinated” 

The Alinsky Play is Clear – California State Joins New York City and Veterans Administration in Mandating 

Vaccination Shots for Employees, Simultaneous to CDC Changing COVID Test 

•  Attending religious services can ward off depression 

•  Breaking News Concerning COVID Vaccines - Faith & Freedom 

•  California unveils system to provide digital COVID-19 vaccine records 

•  Chile has one of the world’s best vaccination rates. COVID is surging there anyway 

•  Colleges That Will Require Students or Employees to Be Vaccinated Against Covid-19 

•  Covid Booster Shots May Be Needed By The Fall, Says Former FDA Head 

•  COVID Databases Are Among Us, And Governors Must Fight And Win Now — Or Never 

•  Cuomo: 'We have to' knock on doors, put people in cars and drive them to get COVID vaccine 

•  Do Masks Work? Viral immunologist Dr. Byram Bridle performs a simple experiment 

Emails Reveal How Influential Articles That Established COVID-19 Natural Origins Theory Were Formed 

European Countries Halt Use of AstraZeneca Vaccine 

The COVID Vaccines - part 1 (Scientific Articles Exposing Vaccine Myths and Pharma Foibles) 

The COVID Vaccines - part 2 (Scientific Articles Exposing Vaccine Myths and Pharma Foibles)  

o  What we know: Pfizer/BioNTech (BNT162b2) | Moderna (mRNA-1273) | AstraZeneca (AZD1222) 

o  Vaccine-induced Spike Antibodies: Havoc on Lungs | Evidence Ignored | Unanswered questions 

France considers slowing vaccine rollout for hospital staff, with many unable to work following jab 

Latest Google Censorship Due to Their Vaccine Investment 

•  GOP House Intel says 'overwhelming circumstantial evidence' points to Wuhan lab as COVID origin 

•  HHS website lists both the Nuremberg Code and the Helsinki Declaration 

•  Hospital Reverses Oppressive Vaccine Visitation Policy - Faith & Freedom 

•  Hospital Suspends 178 Workers for Not Complying With COVID-19 Vaccine Mandate 

IL School District Reverses "Vaccine" Policy 

Israeli People's Committee (April 2021): From Uncontrollable Impulse to Criminal Spin? 

Joint CDC and FDA Statement on Johnson & Johnson COVID-19 Vaccine 

Lambda Variant’s ‘Unusual’ Mutations May Make It Resistant to Vaccines: Researchers 

Lawsuit filed against Israeli government for violating Nuremberg Code of Medical Ethics 

Leaked Pfizer Study: Vax Particles Massively Build Up In Ovaries 

Life ‘Needs to Be Hard’ for Unvaccinated Americans - CNN Medical Analyst 

LSU Dental School Reverses "Vaccine" Policy 

•  Medical Industry has been Weaponized - Dr. Tenpenny and Dr. Merritt 

•  Michigan Hospital Reverses "Vaccine" Visitation Policy 

•  Military programs aiming to end pandemics forever: 60 Minutes 

• 

The Nuremberg Code 

•  OSHA Suspends Reporting Adverse COVID Shot Reactions 

•  Rare vaccine injury claims steered to obscure federal office 

•  Recovered COVID-19 Patients Possess Robust Immunity To Virus 

Safety and Efficacy of the BNT162b2 mRNA Covid-19 Vaccine 

State Vaccination Exemptions Map 

States Fight Back Against Vaccine Passports 

Study: People Who Have Recovered From COVID-19 Unlikely to Benefit From Vaccine 

Sweden joins Germany, France, and 15 other countries in suspending AstraZeneca's vaccine over possible 

side effects 

•  Unvaccinated Cadets at West Point Forced to Live in Tent for Summer Training 

•  US Recommends Pausing Use of J&J Vaccine After Rare Complications 

•  Vaccine Animal Trials Reveal Threat to Life in the Womb 

Page 54 of 63

•  Vax or Jail? The Dilemma Facing Some Americans 

•  West Point presentation - Dr. Charles Morgan on Psycho-Neurobiology and War 

•  What Happens When Your Kid Develops MIS-C, A Rare COVID-19 Complication 

•  WMA Declaration of Helsinki 

Natural Immunity 

•  Covid-19 natural immunity compared to vaccine-induced immunity: The definitive summary 

•  COVID Prevention / Treatment - document 

•  Harvard epidemiologist: Major study demolishes case for vaccine passports 

•  Harvard Study - Immune Memory after COVID-19 

•  Having SARS-CoV-2 once confers much greater immunity than a vaccine—but vaccination remains vital  

o 

STUDY: Comparing SARS-CoV-2 natural immunity to vaccine-induced immunity: reinfections versus 

•  Horowitz: 15 studies that indicate natural immunity from prior infection is more robust than the COVID 

breakthrough infections 

vaccines 

Study: Recovered COVID-19 Patients Possess Robust Immunity To Virus  

o 

Longitudinal analysis shows durable and broad immune memory after SARS-CoV-2 infection with 

persisting antibody responses and memory B and T cells 

'This Ends The Debate' - Israeli Study Shows Natural Immunity 13x More Effective Than Vaccines At 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Stopping Delta 

Personal Stories of Adverse Reactions 

• 

1000 COVID Stories 

•  C19 Vax Reactions  

o  Real Medical Observations 

o  Real Testimonies 

o  Real Video Stories 

o 

Studies, Reactions and Correspondence 

o  Q&A Interviews 

Eric Clapton 'Disastrous' Covid Vaccine Experience 

Family blames Johnson & Johnson vaccine for man's stroke 

Fueled by Delta variant, COVID resurgence races across Israel 

Instagram Personal Stories 

o 

Lita 

o  Queen city 

Israel testimonies on adverse reactions and deaths from Pfizer shots 

Kennedy, Aged 19 - Pfizer Severe Adverse Reaction - No More Silence - Telling Our Stories 

•  NCAA Student Golfer Has Heart Disease after COVID Shot - Offered Bribe to Silence Story 

•  No More Silence 

See Us. Hear Us. Believe Us. Heal Us. 

Testimonies & Reports—First-Hand 

The Testimonies Project 

Sen. Johnson Press Conference Featuring Personal Testimonies 

“THESE PATIENTS DESERVE TO BE HEARD” -VAERS WHISTLEBLOWER 

Three nurses share personal stories of seizures following COVID shots (full video)  

o  Nurse Shares Her Personal Story of Seizures Following Covid Shots 

Page 55 of 63

 
Resources—Other 

•  America's Frontline Doctors  

o  Telemed Consultation 

•  American King Foundation 

•  BioRxiv: posts many COVID 19 related papers 

•  Del Bigtree  

o  Facebook 

o  The Highwire 

• 

Frontline Covid19 Critical Care Alliance 

•  Geert Vanden Bossche (DVM, PhD)  

•  My Free Doctor 

• 

Peter McCullough, MD, MPH  

o  Bioterrorism 

o  The COVID Cult in the Medical Industry 

o  Curriculum Vitae 

o  Debunking Covid 

o  Mortality Risk and Treatment Protocol 

o  Why the ongoing mass vaccination experiment drives a rapid evolutionary response of SARS-CoV-2 

•  Majority of Physicians Decline COVID Shots, according to Survey 

o  Effective COVID Treatments - Faith & Freedom with Mat Staver and Peter McCullough, MD, MPH 

o  Pathophysiological Basis and Rationale for Early Outpatient Treatment of SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19) 

o  Testifies to Texas Senate HHS Committee about Covid-19 

o 

‘whistleblowers’ inside CDC who claim injections have already killed 50,000 Americans 

o 

Learn the Truth about COVID — with Mat Staver 

• 

Joseph Mercola, DO 

•  Mercola — Take Control of Your Health  

o  Byram Bridle, Ph.D.: ‘We Made a Big Mistake’ on COVID-19 Vaccine 

o  Fauci EXPOSED, COVID Defined. 

'Shedding', Jab Recovery and DEFEATING the 'Virus' 

'Vaccines' EXPOSED! "It Really is a Bioweapon" - 5G, Graphene, Military... 

Infection 

• 

Lee D. Merritt, MD  

o  Twitter 

• 

Judy Mikovits, Ph.D.  

o 

o 

•  Natural News 

PUSHhealth 

• 

• 

Sherri Tenpenny, DO  

o  Facebook 

o  Gab 

o  Radio & Podcast 

o  Rumble 

o  Telegram 

o  TV Interviews 

o  Twitter 

o  How the Depopulation COVID Vaccines will Start Working in 3-6 Months 

•  Dr. Vladimir Zelenko, MD 

Page 56 of 63

 
 
Risks and Warnings 

•  Are We Creating Immune Resistant Variants Of SARS-CoV-2? 

•  CDC Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (Transcript) 

•  CDC warns Covid-19 vaccines might not protect people who are immunocompromised 

•  Doctors for COVID Ethics: Halt Use of Pfizer COVID Vaccines in Adolescents 'Immediately' 

•  Doctors Issue Warning 

• 

Fertility, Pregnancy, and Miscarriages  

o  3 Dozen Cases of Spontaneous Miscarriages, Stillbirths Occurring After COVID-19 Vaccination 

o  Breastfeeding Baby Dies After Mother Receives Pfizer 

o  Can You Trust the CDC Regarding Pregnancy 

o  CDC Warned to Halt COVID Shots 

o  NIH: COVID-19 Vaccines and the Menstrual Cycle—What you need to know 

o  Experts Warn of ‘Huge Risk’ as Moderna Launches COVID Vaccine Trials for Pregnant Women 

o  Health officials push pregnant women to get COVID shots, despite known risks 

o  Mass Vaccination Risks (Video) 

o  Menstrual Changes After COVID-19 Vaccination Should Be Actively Investigated: Reproductive 

Immunologist 

o  Menstrual Changes, Infertility, and Transmission 

o  Pregnant Women Should Not Get a COVID Vaccine 

o  Reports of abnormal periods after COVID-19 vaccinations prompt NIH to award funding to study 

potential link 

Immunization with SARS coronavirus vaccines leads to pulmonary immunopathology on challenge with the 

SARS virus—PubMed.gov 

Informed consent disclosure to vaccine trial subjects 

PATHOLOGIST SUMMARY OF WHAT THESE JABS DO TO THE BRAIN AND OTHER ORGANS 

•  Risks Outweigh the Benefits 

The Truth About COVID Vaccine and Alternatives - Faith & Freedom 

•  Ways the Vaccine Will Harm Your Health - Dr. Mercola 

•  What COVID Injections Do To Your BLOOD! Doctor Releases Horrific Findings! 

•  WHO whistleblower - vaccines as a bioweapon to depopulate 

•  World Leaders Warn Humanity 

Spike Protein and Affected Body Organs 

•  Common dandelion (Taraxacum officinale) efficiently blocks the interaction between... 

•  Could Spike Protein in Moderna, Pfizer Vaccines Cause Blood Clots, Brain Inflammation and Heart Attacks? 

•  COVID-19 CAN AFFECT THE BLOOD. ITS SPIKE PROTEIN MAY BE THE CULPRIT  

o 

STUDY - Biological and Clinical Consequences of Integrin Binding via a Rogue RGD Motif in the 

SARS CoV-2 Spike Protein 

•  How the Spike Protein Hurts the Heart 

Inventor of mRNA Technology: Vaccine Causes Lipid Nanoparticles to Accumulate in ‘High Concentrations’ 

in Ovaries 

Leaked Pfizer Study: Vax Particles Massively Build Up In Ovaries 

Pfizer Confidential Document: Summary of Pharmacokinetic Study 

Salk Institute Science Paper reveals... 

SARS-CoV-2 Spike Protein Impairs Endothelial Function via Downregulation of ACE 2 

The novel coronavirus’ spike protein plays additional key role in illness 

•  Vaccinated people can shed spike protein, Twitter says delete this 

•  Vaccine researcher admits ‘big mistake,’ says spike protein is dangerous ‘toxin’ 

•  Ways the Vaccine Will Harm Your Health - Dr. Mercola 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Page 57 of 63

• 

• 

S1 protein of SARS-CoV-2 crosses the blood–brain barrier in mice - Nature Neuroscience 

Spike Protein passes blood brain barrier — Dr. Byram. W. Bridle, Ph.D. 

o  Dr. Byram Bridle Bio 

State Laws 

•  CA: Los Angeles Passes One of the Strictest US COVID-19 Vaccination Mandates 

• 

TX: Executive Order No. GA-40 relating to prohibiting vaccine mandates, subject to legislative action. 

Transmission of Adverse Reactions from COVID Shots 

• 

Johns Hopkins Document Regarding Self-Replicating Vaccines 

•  Menstrual Changes, Infertility, and Transmission: Medical Doctors (Dr. Sherri Tenpenny and others) 

•  mRNA technology pioneer says Covid-19 vaccinated people can shed spike protein 

o  mRNA pioneer Luigi Warren Tweet regarding "shedding" 

• 

• 

• 

Pfizer Protocol Document - (pages 44, 67-69 only) 

Pfizer Protocol Document-full document  (see pages 44,67-69) 

'Shedding', Jab Recovery and DEFEATING the 'Virus' 

Treatments: HCQ | Ivermectin | Adverse Reactions | Shot 

Resources 

•  Drug used to reduce blood fats may cut Covid infection by 70%: Study 

•  Where can you get HELP?   

o  America's Frontline Doctors 

o  ECareNow  

o  HoneyBee Health 

o  My Free Doctor 

o  PUSHhealth 

o  Text2MD 

•  Changes to CDC RT-PCR for SARS-CoV-2 Testing 

•  COVID Prevention / Treatment - document 

Early Treatment: Real-Time Analysis of Hundreds of Studies 

FLCCC Treatment Protocols 

Peter McCullough, MD, MPH  

o  Mortality Risk and Treatment Protocol 

Lee D. Merritt, MD 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

o  Effective COVID Treatments - Faith & Freedom with Mat Staver and Peter McCullough, MD, MPH 

'Long COVID' symptoms' cause may have been uncovered in new research  

o 

STUDY: Persistent clotting protein pathology in Long COVID/Post-Acute Sequelae of COVID-19 

(PASC) is accompanied by increased levels of antiplasmin 

•  MATH+ Hospital Treatment Protocol for COVID-19  

o  Mortality Risk and Treatment Protocol 

•  Remdisivir - Interview on COVID 

Sherri Tenpenny, DO 

Study: Recovered COVID-19 Patients Possess Robust Immunity To Virus 

•  Dr. Vladimir Zelenko, MD 

Page 58 of 63

 
•  A Guide to Home-Based COVID Treatment 

• 

Lab discovers root cause of confusion, fatigue experienced by COVID 'long haulers' 

Adverse Reaction Treatments 

Treatment from the Shot 

I-RECOVER Management Protocol for Long Haul COVID-19 Syndrome (LHCS) 

•  COVID Long Haulers - supporting articles 

• 

• 

• 

•  How to Protect Your Health Post-Jab (page 11) 

'Shedding', Jab Recovery and DEFEATING the 'Virus' 

Treatment Considerations Based on Evidence 

•  Dr. Vladimir Zelenko, MD 

Hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) 

•  Academic Fraud regarding Hydroxychloroquine 

•  After 440,000 Americans reportedly died, mainstream media and Big Tech finally admit 

Hydroxychloroquine works 

•  Battle for the reputation of Hydroxychloroquine 

•  Dr. Harvey Risch of Yale, on Hydroxychloroquine 

• 

Fauci knew about HCQ in 2005 -- nobody needed to die 

•  HCQ - Hydroxychloroquine 

•  HCQ. We were right. They were wrong. 

•  Hydroxychloroquine and COVID-19 Fact Sheet 

•  Hydroxychloroquine-based multidrug regimens > 60% reduction in mortality 

• 

Journal of Medicine says HCQ + Zinc Reduces COVID Deaths 

•  Report: Other countries faring better against COVID due to hydroxychloroquine, not lockdowns 

•  Weight-Adjusted Hydroxychloroquine and Azithromycin Boosted Survival of Ventilated COVID-19 Patients 

by 200 Percent: Study  

o  Observational Study on 255 Mechanically Ventilated Covid Patients 

•  Where can you get HCQ?   

o  America's Frontline Doctors 

o  HoneyBee Health 

o  My Free Doctor 

o  PUSHhealth 

Ivermectin 

•  World renowned doctor blows the lid off of COVID vaccine - "pandemic was about the vaccine" 

•  Antiparasitic drug reduces length of COVID-19 infection 

•  Antiparasitic drug Ivermectin kills coronavirus in 48 hours 

•  Clinical Trials Evidence for Ivermectin in COVID-19 

•  COVID-19 Coincidence of Anti-Scabies medicine in Toronto nursing home - Turning Point? 

•  Database of all ivermectin COVID-19 studies - 116 studies 

•  Doctors Raise Awareness on Ivermectin Treatment for COVID-19 

•  Dr. Pierre Kory testifies to Senate Committee about Ivermectin, Dec. 8, 2020 - TRANSCRIPT 

• 

• 

Favorable outcome on viral load and culture viability using Ivermectin in early treatment 

Israeli scientist says COVID-19 could be treated for under $1/day -- STUDY -- earlier STUDY 

Page 59 of 63

Ivermectin: a multifaceted drug of Nobel prize-honoured distinction with indicated efficacy against a new 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

global scourge, COVID-19 

Ivermectin in COVID-19 

Ivermectin obliterates 97 percent of Delhi cases 

Ivermectin Study - American Journal of Therapeutics 

Ivermectin Study - Science Direct 

Ivermectin Wins in Court Again: For Human Rights 

•  Medical journal calls for Ivermectin to be 'globally & systematically deployed' 

•  New Study Links Ivermectin to ‘Large Reductions’ In COVID-19 Deaths 

•  Nigerian Study Shows The Use of Ivermectin Alone in Treating COVID-19 as Effective as 

Hydroxychloroquine, Azithromycin, and Ivermectin Combination 

•  Review of the Emerging Evidence Demonstrating the Efficacy of Ivermectin in the Prophylaxis and 

Treatment of COVID-19 

• 

The unmistakable ivermectin miracle in the Indian state of Uttar Pradesh  

•  Where can you get Ivermectin?   

o  America's Frontline Doctors 

o  FLCCC: How to Get Ivermectin 

o  HoneyBee Health 

o  My Free Doctor 

o  PUSHhealth 

•  WHO-sponsored review of ivermectin trials indicates 83% reduction in covid mortality 

•  Why Is the FDA Attacking a Safe, Effective Drug? 

• 

Lee D. Merritt, MD 

o  Alternatives to COVID “Vaccine” - Dr. Lee Merritt - Faith & Freedom 

o  Exposing COVID Truths - part 1 - Freedom Alive!™ 

o  Exposing COVID Truths - part 2 - Freedom Alive!™ 

o  Has the truth been suppressed for decades? 

o  The New American: Interview 

•  MD testifies to Texas Senate HHS Committee on Treatment - Dr. Peter McCullough 

•  mRNA Vaccines, HIV, COVID and Treatments - Dr. Tenpenny & Dr. Flemming 

The COVID Cult in the Medical Industry - Dr. Peter McCullough 

Telemed Consultation 

• 

• 

Vaccines 

Comirnaty 

• 

o  The FDA plainly indicates that BioNTech's COMIRNATY is not available in the United States: 

“Although COMIRNATY (COVID-19 Vaccine, mRNA) is approved to prevent COVID-19 in individuals 

16 years of age and older, there is no sufficient approved vaccine for distribution to the 

population.” (Pfizer Letter at 6 n.12.) 

o  The CDC has stated that "COMIRNATY products are not orderable at this time." The CDC also 

included a statement from Pfizer: "'At present, Pfizer does not plan to produce any product with 

these new NDCs and labels over the next few months while EUA authorized product is still 

available and being made available for U.S. distribution. As such, the CDC, AMA, and drug 

compendia may not publish these new codes until Pfizer has determined when the product will be 

produced with the BLA labels.'" 

o  The National Institutes of Health (NIH) also posted the above statement from Pfizer. 

Page 60 of 63

 
o  Below are three press releases that include the August and September FDA letters stating that 

COMIRNATY is not available.  

▪ 

FDA Does a Bait and Switch with COVID Shots 

▪  No FDA-Approved COVID-19 Shots Available 

▪  Class Action Lawsuit, Count I and Memorandum of Law, addressing the EUA and that 

COMIRNATY is not available. 

Johnson & Johnson 

• 

• 

Pfizer-BioNTech 

Vaccine Development 

o  Waning COVID vaccine efficacy especially against reinfection  

▪  Breakthrough SARS-CoV-2 infections in 620,000 U.S. Veterans, February 1, 2021to August 

13, 2021 (STUDY) 

o 

Scientists question FDA on ‘scant’ J&J booster data and speedy review 

o  PFIZER LEAKS: Whistleblower Goes On Record, Reveals Internal Emails from Chief Scientific Officer 

& Senior Director of Worldwide Research Discussing COVID Vaccine ... ‘We Want to Avoid Having 

the Information on the Fetal Cells Floating Out There’ 

The 5 Stages of Vaccine Development 

The Coronavirus Vaccine Uncensored - Robert F. Kennedy Jr. & Del Bigtree 

Legal Memo 

•  Moderna Rep Admits Everyone Is Part of Huge Experiment (scroll to about 6:30) 

Psycho-Neurobiology and War 

Some Vaccines Last a Lifetime. Here’s Why Covid-19 Shots Don’t. 

The last time the government sought a ‘warp speed’ vaccine, it was a fiasco 

•  Vaccines and Aborted Babies 

Vaccines—Other 

•  Are We Creating Immune Resistant Variants Of SARS-CoV-2? 

•  CDC finally pulling PCR tests as they can’t differentiate between Covid and the Flu... 

Immunization with SARS coronavirus vaccines leads to pulmonary immunopathology on challenge with the 

SARS virus—PubMed.gov 

Israeli Holocaust Survivor—"Global Genocide" 

Legal Memo 

•  Mayo Clinic: Pfizer Jab Maybe 42 % Effective Against So-Called Delta 

•  National Vaccine Information Center  

o 

State Exemptions 

Pfizer and Moderna to expand size of vaccine studies in 5- to 11-year-olds 

Pfizer Agreements: ‘There’s good reason Pfizer fought to hide the details of these contracts’ 

•  Religious Exemptions for Vaccines at Risk - Faith & Freedom 

The Five Stages of Vaccine Development 

The Nuremberg Code 

'Vaccines' EXPOSED! "It Really is a Bioweapon" - 5G, Graphene, Military... 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Page 61 of 63

 
 
•  WHO whistleblower - vaccines as a bioweapon to depopulate 

•  WMA Declaration of Helsinki 

Vaccine Passports and Contact Tracing 

•  AAPS STATEMENT—In Support of the Right of All, Including Medical Workers, to Decline Medical 

Intervention 

•  AEG To Require Proof Of Vaccine At Events After Oct. 1 

•  Australia Traded Away Too Much Liberty 

• 

15 EU Countries & Iceland Already Issuing COVID-19 Vaccine Passports for Travel 

•  California unveils system to provide digital COVID-19 vaccine records 

•  CDC Director: Vaccine Passports ‘May Very Well Be a Path Forward’ in US 

•  Dangers of Vaccine Passports - Part 1 - Freedom Alive!™ 

•  Dangers of Vaccine Passports - Part 2 - Freedom Alive!™ 

•  Digitizing health—vaccine passports, birth control microchip implants? 

Federal Health IT Coordinating Council PowerPoint 

Federal Vaccination Plan 

FL Executive Order: Prohibiting Vaccine Passports 

ID2020 and partners launch program to provide digital ID with vaccines 

Invisible Ink Could Reveal whether Kids Have Been Vaccinated 

Israel is ‘petri-dish’ for vaccine passports, injections: ‘a new Holocaust’ 

Liberty Counsel Action Emails 

Liberty Counsel Memo on Vaccine Mandates 

•  Montana only state to ban vaccine requirements for employees 

•  Naomi Wolf, Ph.D.Physicians to Universities: Allow Students Back Without COVID Vaccine Mandate  

o 

'Vaccine Passports' Are the 'End of Human Liberty in the West' 

o  Bannons War Room: Vaccine Fascism in Oregon 

o  Bannons War Room: Lock Step of Tyrants … Dr. Naomi Wolf on Vaccine Passports 

•  Oregon Pushes Freedom-Killing Vaccine Passports - Faith & Freedom 

S.F. exploring potential mandate requiring vaccination proof for entry to indoor restaurants, gyms 

SIX TRIGGER CRITERIA FOR STATE COVID-19 VACCINATION MANDATES 

The Coming Ominous Digital Vaccine Passport - Faith & Freedom 

•  U.S. State Listing of Vaccine Passport Bans 

•  Vaccine Passport Warnings Prove Accurate - Faith & Freedom 

•  Veterans Affairs to mandate COVID vaccine for health care personnel, first such mandate for federal agency 

•  Video: Contact Tracing Scarier than you Imagined: video 

•  Washington’s COVID vaccine mandates ordered by Gov. Jay Inslee are among the strictest in the nation 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Community Health Ambassadors—Door Knocking Project 

•  COVID-Vaccine QA 

•  Door Knocking Script 

Powerpoint Presentation 

Training Video 

•  Vax-Zine for Teens 

• 

• 

Page 62 of 63

 
 
 
Wuhan Institute of Virology 

•  An Orchestrated Hoax 

•  Bombshell: Chinese Military Tied to Wuhan Lab 

•  Chinese Communist member data leak shows thousands in US government, companies and more: report 

•  Chinese Search Traffic Shines A Light On Coronavirus Origins And Raises A Host Of New Questions 

•  Chinese scientist expelled from Canadian bio lab shipped lethal viruses to Wuhan 

•  CONFLICT OF INTEREST: WHO’s COVID Investigator is Recipient of Chinese Communist Cash, Worked With 

•  Covid-19 Panel of Scientists Investigating Origins of Virus Is Disbanded 

EcoHealth’s Peter Daszak Claims People ‘Misunderstand The Chinese Government’ While Defending 

Emails Detail How Fauci’s Office Received Pre-Pandemic Updates From China 

EXC: Lancet’s COVID Chairman Jeffrey Sachs States “Opposition” To “Confronting” China, Linked to Hunter 

Explosive, Unearthed Video Shows Peter Daszak Describing ‘Chinese Colleagues’ Developing ‘Killer’ 

•  Chinese Whistleblowers speak out 

Wuhan Lab for 18 Years. 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Wuhan Lab. 

Biden’s China Energy Deals. 

Coronaviruses 

•  Google's reported ties to Wuhan linked scientist points to one of the 'biggest scandals' of our time: Hilton 

•  House Intelligence Report 

• 

Lab-Leak Theory: Inside the Fight to Uncover COVID-19’s Origins 

•  Newly-Released Documents Detail US-Funded Coronavirus Research at Wuhan Institute of Virology: Report 

•  Newly Released Documents Show NIH Funded Gain-of-Function Research in China: Experts (Gain-of-

•  REVEALED: Daszak Admits Fauci Funded Chinese Coronavirus Research at Conference Featuring Hunter 

Function Research in China) 

Biden-Linked Pandemic Group. 

• 

SCALP: Lancet Scrubs ENTIRE COVID Origins Investigation Team After National Pulse Exposés. 

•  WATCH: CCP’s ‘Bat Lady’ Thanks NIH & ‘Longtime Collaborator’ Peter Daszak. 

•  Wuhan scientists planned to release coronaviruses into cave bats 18 months before outbreak 

Page 63 of 63

 
