U.S. Department of Homeland Security 
 Washington, DC  20472 

NOTICE OF RIGHT TO FILE FORMAL COMPLAINT 

December 5, 2024 

Via email at: maxmeindl@fema.dhs.gov 

Max J. Meindl  
5 E. Austin St.  
Bellville, TX 77418 

RE:  Agency File No.:  HS-FEMA-02430-2024 

Dear Max J. Meindl: 

This serves as the Notice of Right to File a formal complaint required by the Equal Employment 
Opportunity (EEO) complaint process implementing regulations at 29 Code of Federal 
Regulations, Section 1614.105, on the above-referenced informal EEO complaint.   

Your complaint was not resolved during the informal complaint process; thus, I am required to 
issue you this Notice of Right to File a formal EEO complaint.  If you wish to file a formal EEO 
complaint, please send your formal complaint to the Office of Equal Rights (OER) within 15 
calendar days from the date you receive this letter to following address by mail or email: 

Office of Equal Rights (OER) 
ATTN:  Angela McGonigal, EEO Chief 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) 
U.S. Department of Homeland Security 
500 C Street, SW  
4th Floor – 4SW-0915 
Washington, DC  20472-3535 

Email: Angela.McGonigal@fema.dhs.gov 
            FEMA-OCR-EEO@fema.dhs.gov  

The formal complaint must be sufficiently precise to identify the aggrieved individual and the 
agency and to describe generally the action(s) or practice(s) that form the basis of the complaint.  
It must contain only the issues specifically raised in the informal complaint process or like or 
related to those discussed.  The complaint must state if you have filed a grievance under the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
negotiated grievance procedures or an appeal to the Merit Systems Protection Board (MSPB).  
The complaint must contain a telephone number and address where you can be contacted. 

Please refer to the “Notice of Rights and Responsibilities” you received for specific information 
about EEO complaint process, including your rights when alleging age discrimination, a 
violation of the Equal Pay Act, or raising a claim that is appealable to the MSPB. 

If you have further questions regarding this letter or the EEO complaint process, please contact 
me at (202) 802-6485. 

Sincerely, 

EEO Specialist  
Office of Civil Rights 
Federal Emergency Management Agency   

Enclosure:  Formal Complaint Form 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
