OPM-VI-I-1 

A Guide to Telework in the Federal Government 

Introduction 

Late 20th-century technology revolutionized the workplace, and the 21st-century workplace is 
evolving even further.  Computers, remote connectivity, voice and electronic communications, 
paperless work processes, and other innovations make information and work increasingly 
mobile.   

Such innovations help the Federal Government, as the Nation’s largest employer, serve the 
needs of the American public more efficiently and effectively.  Federal employees have used 
mobile work technology for a long time.  In recent years, telework has become increasingly 
widespread and formalized, with legislative mandates as well as new programmatic and policy 
supports and structures. 

The Office of Personnel Management defines telework as “work arrangements in which an 
employee regularly performs officially assigned duties at home or other worksites geographically 
convenient to the residence of the employee.”  Telework is simply a way of getting work done 
from a different location.  It can serve multiple purposes – and have multiple benefits – when it 
is implemented effectively in an organization. 

For Federal agencies, telework is of particular interest for its benefits in the following areas: 

•  Recruiting and retaining the best possible workforce - particularly newer workers who 

have high expectations of a technologically forward-thinking workplace and any worker 
who values work/life balance 

•  Helping employees manage long commutes and other work/life issues that, if not 

addressed, can have a negative impact on their effectiveness or lead to employees 
leaving Federal employment 

•  Reducing traffic congestion, emissions, and infrastructure impact in urban areas, thereby 

improving the environment 

•  Saving taxpayer dollars by decreasing Government real estate costs 
•  Ensuring continuity of essential Government functions in the event of national or local 

emergencies 

This guide is intended to help Federal managers and employees understand how to make 
telework a routine part of doing business, as well as how to integrate telework into emergency 
planning.  

Legislative Background 

For over a decade, laws addressing telework (under various names – “work at home,” “flexible 
work,” “telecommuting,” etc.) have been in effect for Federal employees.  The main legislative 
mandate for telework was established in 2000 (§ 359 of Public Law 106-346).  This law states 
that “[e]ach executive agency shall establish a policy under which eligible employees of the 
agency may participate in telecommuting to the maximum extent possible without diminished 
employee performance.”  Associated language in the conference report for this legislation 
expanded on that requirement:   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OPM-VI-I-2 

Each agency participating in the program shall develop criteria to be used in 
implementing such a policy and ensure that managerial, logistical, organizational, 
or other barriers to full implementation and successful functioning of the policy 
are removed.  Each agency should also provide for adequate administrative, 
human resources, technical, and logistical support for carrying out the policy. 

Further legislation (Public Law 108-199, Division B, § 627 of January 23, 2004, and Public Law 
108-447, Division B, § 622 of December 8, 2004) followed this mandate with directives to 
certain agencies to increase telework participation in the workforce by specified amounts. 

As part of this congressional mandate, OPM began to survey Federal agencies about telework 
in 2000.  This Call for Telework Data collects information about agency programs and 
participation rates. 

Joint OPM/GSA Support 

OPM and the General Services Administration (GSA) work together to support telework in 
Federal agencies.  The joint OPM/GSA Website www.telework.gov provides information to 
agencies, managers, and employees about how to effectively implement telework programs and 
arrangements.  OPM and GSA also work directly with telework coordinators in each agency to 
provide guidance and assistance. 

Definitions/Types of Telework 

The terms “telework,” “telecommuting,” “flexible workplace,”  “remote work,” “virtual work,” and 
“mobile work” are all used to refer to work done outside of the traditional on-site work 
environment.  These terms are defined in different ways and used in different contexts to refer 
to anything from jobs that are completely “virtual” or “mobile,” to arrangements that enable 
employees to work from home a few days per week or per month. 

OPM uses the term “telework” for reporting purposes and for all other activities related to policy 
and legislation.  OPM defines telework as “work arrangements in which an employee regularly 
performs officially assigned duties at home or other work sites geographically convenient to the 
residence of the employee.”   

Telework arrangements in the Federal Government are most often part-time rather than full-
time, although full-time telework does exist.  Agencies may, at their own discretion, define and 
use the types of telework that best fit their business needs.  However, for purposes of reporting 
and judging progress towards meeting the legislative mandate, OPM will count employees 
whose telework frequency is in one of the following categories only: 

•  Regular/recurring at least 3 days per week 
•  1 or 2 days per week 
•  Less often than once a week, but at least once a month 

As defined by OPM, telework is not— 

•  Work extension:  Many employees take work home with them.  This is remote work, but 

it is not considered telework within the scope of the legislation. 

•  Mobile work:  Some agencies have employees who, by the nature of their jobs, are 

generally off-site, and may even use their home as their “home base.”  Because their 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OPM-VI-I-3 

work requires this setup and they travel much of the time, they are not considered 
teleworkers.  This is different from “hoteling” arrangements, in which frequent 
teleworkers use shared space when they are on-site. 

Telework is not an employee right.  Federal law requires agencies to have telework programs, 
but does not give individual employees a legal right to telework. 

Sustaining a Successful Telework Program –  
A Manager’s Perspective 

What’s in it for me? 

Compliance with the Mandate 

As described in Legislative Background, telework should be implemented to the maximum 
extent possible. 

Human Capital Management Tool 

Telework, like other flexibilities, can assist managers in attracting, recruiting, and retaining the 
best possible workforce.  In addition, by decreasing employee commute times and other 
work/life stressors, telework can help make employees more effective in their jobs.  Telework 
may also be used as a reasonable accommodation for disability. 

Emergency Response 

Integrating work fully into an organization’s operations and culture can help maintain critical 
functionality in the event of an emergency.  

The Basics 

Know Your Telework Coordinator 

Each agency should designate a telework coordinator who acts as the key contact for policy and 
program questions.  Managers should maintain frequent contact with their telework coordinator 
to ensure the agency’s policy and procedures are properly applied and to ensure they are aware 
of the full range of support and resources available to them. 

Know Your Policy and Procedures 

As detailed in §359 of Public Law 106-346, all agencies must have a telework policy.  Managers 
should familiarize themselves and their employees with their agency’s policy to ensure they are 
in compliance with its requirements.  Most agency policies will include additional procedures for 
establishing telework agreements, obtaining equipment, etc.  

In addition, all agencies should have policies on information systems and technology security 
(see Security), and managers must ensure their equipment choices and telework agreements 
comply with this policy.  Information security includes protection of sensitive “hard-copy” files 
and documents. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
OPM-VI-I-4 

Participate in Training 

OPM offers online telework training for employees and managers, which can be accessed via 
the joint OPM/GSA Website http://telework.gov/tools_and_resources/training/index.aspx.  In 
addition, many agencies offer telework training, and telework coordinators are available to 
consult with managers.  

Information technology security training, administered at the agency level, is mandatory (see 
Security), and managers must ensure teleworkers complete this training and understand their 
responsibilities in safeguarding work-related information. 

How To Be an Effective Telework Manager 

To comply with the legislation, managers must be committed to using telework to the fullest 
extent possible.  Beyond the basic requirements outlined above, managerial skill, participation, 
and support can make telework a real asset to an organization.  To effectively implement a 
telework program, managers should accomplish the following: 

Determine Employee Eligibility 

Generally, agencies have discretion to determine telework eligibility criteria for their employees.  
These criteria should be detailed in agency policy.  Individual managers should assess who is 
and who is not eligible in their workgroup based on these eligibility guidelines and any 
applicable collective bargaining agreements.  Some agencies may provide managers additional 
discretion in deciding whether to grant or deny a request to telework from an eligible employee, 
based on additional factors such as staffing or budget. 

All employees are considered eligible for telework except the following:  

•  Employees whose positions require, on a daily basis (i.e., every work day), direct 

handling of secure materials or on-site activity that cannot be handled remotely or at 
an alternative worksite, such as face-to-face personal contact in some medical, 
counseling, or similar services; hands-on contact with machinery, equipment, vehicles, 
etc.; or other physical presence/site dependent activity, such as forest ranger or guard 
duty tasks; and 

•  Employees whose last performance rating of record (or its equivalent) is below fully 

successful (or the agency’s equivalent) or whose conduct has resulted in disciplinary 
action within the last year.  (NOTE:  Agencies may require a rating of record higher than 
fully successful for eligibility, but must still report as eligible all employees rated fully 
successful or higher.) 

Understand and Assess the Needs of the Workgroup 

Telework is often implemented piecemeal, rather than strategically, as individuals request 
arrangements.  This reactive approach carries the risk of raising fairness issues, with decisions 
about telework arrangements being made on a first-come, first-served basis.  Telework should 
be implemented strategically, taking into account the needs and work of the group, rather than 
granting or denying telework requests one by one.  Employees should participate in the process 
and may be asked to help formulate possible solutions to issues that may arise. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OPM-VI-I-5 

Create Signed Agreements 

The teleworker and his or her manager should enter into a written agreement for every type of 
telework, whether the employee teleworks regularly or not.  The parameters of this agreement 
are most often laid out by the agency policy and/or collective bargaining agreement, but should 
include certain key elements (see How To Be an Effective Teleworker).  Most importantly, the 
agreement should be signed and dated by the manager.  Managers should keep copies of all 
telework agreements on file.  

Telework agreements are living documents and should be revisited by the manager and 
teleworker and re-signed regularly, preferably at least once a year.  At a minimum, new telework 
agreements should be executed when a new employee/manager relationship is established. 

OPM strongly recommends any individuals asked to telework in the case of a Continuity of 
Operations (COOP) event or a pandemic health crisis have a telework agreement in place that 
provides for such an occurrence.  Such individuals also should practice teleworking on a regular 
basis as much as possible. 

Base Denials on Business Reasons 

Telework requests may be denied and telework agreements may be terminated.  Telework is 
not an employee right, even if the employee is considered “eligible” by OPM standards and/or 
the individual agency standards.   

Denial and termination decisions must be based on business needs or performance, not 
personal reasons.  For example, a manager may deny a telework agreement if, due to staffing 
issues, an employee who otherwise has portable duties must provide on-site office coverage.  In 
this case, and whenever applicable, the denial or termination should include information about 
when the employee might reapply, and also if applicable, what actions the employee should 
take to improve his or her chance of approval.  Denials should be provided in a timely manner.  
Managers should also review the agency’s negotiated agreement(s) and telework policy to 
ensure they meet any applicable requirements. 

Managers should provide affected employees (and keep copies of) signed written denials or 
terminations of telework agreements.  These should include information about why the 
arrangement was denied or terminated.  OPM tracks the numbers of agreements denied and/or 
terminated, as well as the reasons for such an action; therefore, copies should be given to the 
agency telework coordinator as well. 

Bargaining unit employees may file a grievance about the denial or cancellation of a telework 
agreement through the negotiated grievance procedure.   

Use Good Performance Management Practices 

Managers often ask, “How do I know what my employees are doing when I can’t see them?”  
Performance standards for off-site employees are the same as performance standards for on-
site employees.  Management expectations of a teleworker’s performance should be clearly 
addressed in the telework agreement.  As with on-site employees, teleworkers must, and can, 
be held accountable for the results they produce.  Good performance management techniques 
practiced by a manager will mean a smooth, easy transition to a telework environment.  
Resources for performance management are available from OPM at www.opm.gov/perform.   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OPM-VI-I-6 

Communicate Expectations  

The telework agreement (see How To Be an Effective Teleworker for key elements) provides 
a framework for the discussion that needs to take place between the manager and the 
employee about expectations.  For both routine and emergency telework, this discussion is 
important to ensure the manager and the employee understand each other’s expectations 
around basic issues such as the following: 

•  How will the manager know the employee is present?  (Signing in, signing off 

procedures may be needed.) 

•  How will the manager know the work is being accomplished? 
•  What technologies will be used to maintain contact? 
•  What equipment is the agency providing?  What equipment is the teleworker providing?  
•  Who provides technical assistance in the event of equipment disruption? 
•  What will the weekly/monthly telework schedule be?  How will the manager and co-

workers be kept updated about the schedule?  Do changes need to be pre-approved? 

•  What will the daily telework schedule be?  Will the hours be the same as in the main 

office, or will they be different? 

•  What are the physical attributes of the telework office, and do they conform to basic 

safety standards?  (Use a safety checklist.) 

•  What are the expectations for availability (phone, e-mail, etc.)? 
•  What is the expectation regarding the amount of notice (if any) given for reporting to the 

official worksite, and how will such notice be provided? 

•  How is a telework agreement terminated by management or an employee? 

Facilitate Communication With All Members of the Workgroup 

Teleworking and non-teleworking employees must understand expectations regarding telework 
arrangements, including coverage, communication, and responsibilities.  Although individual 
teleworkers must take responsibility for their own availability and information sharing, managers 
should ensure methods are in place to maintain open communication across the members of a 
workgroup. 

Remain Equitable in Assigning Work and Rewarding Performance 

Managers should avoid distributing work based on “availability” as measured by physical 
presence, and avoid the pitfall of assuming someone who is present and looks busy is actually 
accomplishing more work than someone who is not on-site.  Good performance management 
practices are essential for telework to work effectively and equitably. 

Make Good Decisions About Equipment 

In Federal Management Regulation (FMR) Bulletin 2006-B3, Guidelines for Alternative 
Workplace Arrangements (a link is available at www.telework.gov ), GSA provides guidelines for 
the equipment and support an agency may provide teleworkers.  Generally, decisions are made 
by the agency or by individual managers regarding the ways in which teleworkers should be 
equipped.  Managers should familiarize themselves with these guidelines and also with their 
agency’s policy on equipment.  Within those constraints, the challenge for managers is finding 
the right balance of budget, security, and effectiveness.  Factors to consider include technology 
needs based on the work of the employee, agency security requirements, and budget 
constraints.  

 
 
 
 
 
OPM-VI-I-7 

Practice, Practice, Practice   

The success of an organization’s telework program depends on regular, routine use.  
Experience is the only way to enable managers, employees, IT support, and other stakeholders 
to work through any technology, equipment, communications, workflow, and associated issues 
that may inhibit the transparency of remote work.  Individuals expected to telework in an 
emergency situation should, with some frequency, telework under non-emergency 
circumstances as well. 

The Bottom Line 

Managers MUST— 

Implement routine telework in their organization to the fullest extent possible  
• 
•  Treat employees equitably and fairly in implementing telework in their organization 
• 
• 

Identify eligible and ineligible employees using established agency criteria 
Include telework in COOP and other emergency response planning 

Managers MAY NOT— 

•  Under normal circumstances, require that an employee work from home 
•  Terminate a telework agreement for reasons other than business or performance  

reasons 

Managers MAY— 

•  Require an employee to work at an alternative worksite (e.g., a telework center) within 

the employee’s commuting area 

•  Terminate a telework agreement for business reasons, e.g., an employee’s poor 

performance or a change in the nature of the work 

Sustaining a Successful Telework Arrangement –  
An Employee’s Perspective 

What’s in it for me? 

Work/life Balance 

Telework gives employees more flexibility in meeting personal and professional responsibilities.  

Stress Reduction 

Telework can help make life less stressful overall by reducing commuting time and adding to 
discretionary time, thus reducing commuting stress. 

Freedom From Office Distractions 

Offices can be busy places, especially in environments where employees work in cubicles.  
Distractions are plentiful.  Many employees find they are able to focus and be more productive 
when they telework. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OPM-VI-I-8 

Engagement 

When employees feel they have greater control over their work, they tend to feel more 
committed to their organizations.   

The Basics 

Know Your Telework Coordinator 

All agencies must designate a telework coordinator who acts as the key contact for policy and 
program questions.  Employees should maintain contact with their telework coordinator for 
support and assistance as well as to ensure they follow the agency’s policy and procedures.   

Know Your Agency’s Policy and Procedures 

As required by Public Law 106-346, § 359, all agencies must have a telework policy.  
Employees should familiarize themselves with this policy to ensure they are in compliance with 
its requirements.  Most agency policies will include procedures to be followed for establishing 
telework arrangements, obtaining equipment, etc.  

In addition, employees need to work with their managers and information technology (IT) 
support to ensure their equipment choices and telework agreements comply with their agency’s 
policy on information systems and technology security (see Security).  This includes the 
protection of sensitive files and documents needed for work. 

Participate in Training 

OPM offers online teleworker training, which can be accessed via the joint OPM/GSA Website 
at http://telework.gov/tools_and_resources/training/index.aspx.  In addition, many agencies offer 
various types of training.  Some training may be required for participation in a telework program. 

Information technology security training, administered at the agency level, is mandatory (see 
Security).  Teleworkers must complete this training and understand their responsibilities in 
safeguarding work-related information. 

How To Be an Effective Teleworker 

Conduct an Honest Self-Assessment 

A successful telework arrangement starts with a good self-assessment.  Employees should 
consider the following factors in making an honest determination about their telework 
capabilities: 

•  Sufficient portable work for the amount of telework being proposed 
•  Ability to work independently, without close supervision 
•  Comfort with the technologies, if any, needed to telework 
•  Good communication with manager, co-workers, and customers that will enable a 

relatively seamless transition from on-site to off-site 

•  Telework office space conducive to getting the work done 
•  Dependent care (i.e., child care, elder care, or care of any other dependent adults) 

arrangements in place 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OPM-VI-I-9 

•  Ability to be flexible about the telework arrangement to respond to the needs of the 

manager, the workgroup, and the workload 

Create a Good Telework Agreement 

A successful telework arrangement also requires a strong foundation.  No matter how frequently 
or infrequently an employee intends to telework, a written agreement should be executed 
between the employee and manager.  Elements of this agreement should include the following: 

•  Location of the telework office (e.g., home, telework center, other) 
•  Equipment inventory – what the employee is supplying, what the agency is providing, 

and if applicable, what the telework center is providing 
In general, the job tasks to be performed while teleworking 

• 
•  Telework schedule 
•  Telework contact information (e.g., the phone number to use on the telework day) 
•  Safety checklist – certifying the home office meets certain standards (see Safety) 
•  Expectations for emergency telework (specify whether the employee is expected to 
telework in the case of a COOP event, pandemic health crisis, shutdown of agency 
operations, etc.) 

Telework agreements need to be updated as circumstances change (e.g., if the telework 
schedule changes).  The manager and teleworker should work together to evaluate the 
arrangement periodically, make changes in the agreement as necessary, and re-sign the 
document.  In the first year this may happen within a few months; thereafter, perhaps annually. 

Safeguard Information and Data 

Employees must take responsibility for the security of the data and other information they 
handle while teleworking, as described in Security.  Employees should— 

•  Be familiar with, understand, and comply with their agency’s information security 

policies; 

•  Participate in agency information security training; and 
•  Maintain security of any relevant materials, including files, correspondence, and 

equipment, in addition to following security protocols for remote connectivity.  Depending 
on the sensitivity of the information being handled, the home office may need to include 
security measures such as locked file cabinets, similar to what may be used in the 
worksite 

Plan the Work 

Employees who telework should assess the portability of their work and the level of technology 
available at the remote site as they prepare to telework.  Employees will need to plan their 
telework days to be as productive as possible by considering the following questions: 

•  What files or other documents will I need to take with me when I leave my regular 

workplace the day before teleworking? 

•  What equipment will I need to take? 
•  Who needs to be notified that I will be teleworking? 
•  What other steps should I take before I leave my office? (e.g., forwarding the phone) 
• 

In the case of emergency telework, what should I have available at all times at my home 
office or, if applicable, a telework center, to enable me to be functional without coming 
on-site to retrieve materials? 

 
 
 
 
 
OPM-VI-I-10 

Manage Expectations and Communication 

Managers are ultimately responsible for the effective functioning of the workgroup.  
Nevertheless, teleworkers should help manage the group’s expectations and their own 
communication in order to avoid any negative impact from their arrangement.  Issues that 
should be addressed include the following: 

•  Backup:  Even with very portable work there are inevitably instances where physical 

presence is required and a co-worker may need to step in.  Co-worker backup should be 
planned, it should not be onerous, and it should be reciprocal.  Cross-training of staff has 
broad organizational benefits and should be a management priority.   

•  On-the-spot assistance:  Teleworkers may occasionally need someone who is physically 
in the main office to assist them (e.g., to fax a document or look up information).  Again, 
these arrangements should not be unduly burdensome; a “buddy system” between 
teleworkers may be the least disruptive solution. 

•  Communication with manager:  The manager must be kept apprised of the teleworker’s 
schedule, how to make contact with the teleworker, and the status of all pending work. 
•  Communication with co-workers:  Co-workers must be informed about the appropriate 

handling of telephone calls or other communications that are the teleworker’s 
responsibility. 

The Bottom Line 

Teleworkers MUST— 

•  Comply with the security and telework policies of their agency 
•  Take responsibility for ensuring the success of their arrangement 
•  Notify the manager of any changes in their situation that may affect the arrangement 

Teleworkers MAY NOT— 

•  Assume a telework arrangement is permanent 
•  Use telework as a substitute for child or other dependent care 

Teleworkers MAY— 

•  Use appropriate grievance procedures if they believe their telework request or 

agreement was wrongfully denied or terminated.  Telework requests or agreements may 
be denied or terminated only for business reasons, and managers must provide written 
justification to the affected employee. 

Safety 

Teleworkers must address issues of their own personal safety to be effective while teleworking 
from a home office.  This is not an issue in telework centers, where appropriate workstations are 
provided. 

Government employees causing or suffering work-related injuries and/or damages at the 
alternative worksite (home, telework center, or other location) are covered by the Military 
Personnel and Civilian Employees Claims Act, the Federal Tort Claims Act, or the Federal 
Employees' Compensation Act (workers' compensation), as appropriate. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OPM-VI-I-11 

Manager Safety Responsibilities 

•  Review safety checklist with teleworker. 
•  Depending on agency policy, managers may have the authority to visit home offices, 

with advance notice to the teleworker. 

Teleworker Safety Responsibilities (for home-based telework) 

•  Provide appropriate telework space, with ergonomically correct chair, desk, and 

computer equipment. 

•  Complete safety checklist certifying the space is free from hazards.  This checklist is not 

• 

legally binding, but details management expectations and, if signed, assumes 
compliance. 
Immediately report any work-related accident occurring at the telework site and provide 
the supervisor with all medical documentation related to the accident.  It may be 
necessary for an agency representative to access the home office to investigate the 
report. 

Security 

(Note:  This guidance is subject to change to incorporate pertinent information from the June 23, 
2006, Office of Management and Budget (OMB) memo, “Protection of Sensitive Agency 
Information” http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/memoranda/fy2006/m06-16.pdf.) 

Federal employees and their managers are responsible for the security of Federal Government 
property and information, regardless of their work location.  Agency security policies do not 
change and should be enforced at the same rigorous level when employees telework as when 
they are in the office. 

The Federal Information Security Management Act of 2002 (FISMA) defines information security 
as protecting information and information systems from unauthorized access, use, disclosure, 
disruption, modification, or destruction in order to provide— 

(A) integrity, which means guarding against improper information modification or destruction 

and includes ensuring information nonrepudiation and authenticity; 

(B)  confidentiality, which means preserving authorized restrictions on access and disclosure, 

including means for protecting personal privacy and proprietary information; and 

(C) availability, which means ensuring timely and reliable access to and use of information. 

As in the main office, security measures should cover not only information systems and 
technology, but all aspects of the information systems used by the employee, including paper 
files, other media, storage devices, and telecommunications equipment (e.g., laptops, PDAs, 
and cell phones).  Employees who telework from home need to keep Government property and 
information safe, secure, and separated from their personal property and information.   

Agencies managing or operating records systems are required by the Privacy Act of 1974 and 
other relevant laws and regulations to issue rules for maintaining the security of information 
contained in those records, whether the information is maintained in electronic or paper form.  
Managers and employees must follow these rules whenever they are accessing this information, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OPM-VI-I-12 

whether they are working from home, at another remote location, or at their regular duty station.  
For example, OPM regulates access and use of Government personnel records as follows: 

Section 293.106(a) of title 5, Code of Federal Regulations, mandates that “[a]ll persons 
whose official duties require access to and use of personnel records be responsible and 
accountable for safeguarding those records and for ensuring that the records are 
secured whenever they are not in use or under the direct control of authorized persons.  
Generally, personnel records should be held, processed, or stored only where facilities 
and conditions are adequate to prevent unauthorized access.”   

Under 5 CFR 293.108, “Office and agency employees whose official duties involve 
personnel records shall be sensitive to individual rights to personal privacy and shall not 
disclose information from any personnel record unless disclosure is part of their official 
duties or required by executive order, regulation, or statute (e.g., required by the 
Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C. 552).”  Also, “[a]ny Office or agency employee who 
makes a disclosure of personnel records knowing that such disclosure is unauthorized, 
or otherwise knowingly violates these regulations, shall be subject to disciplinary action 
and may also be subject to criminal penalties where the records are subject to the 
Privacy Act (5 U.S.C. 552a).” 

Each Executive agency must develop a Federal information systems security awareness and 
training plan and provide role-specific security training to employees as required by 5 CFR 
930.301.  The regulations advise agencies to follow the guidance published by the National 
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). 

NIST publications include Special Publication 800-50, “Building an Information Technology 
Security Awareness and Training Program,” which provides a blueprint for developing agency-
specific security awareness and training materials.  NIST advises agencies that users of 
information systems must— 

•  Understand and comply with agency security policies and procedures; 
•  Be appropriately trained in the rules of behavior for the systems and applications to 

which they have access; 

•  Work with management to meet training needs; 
•  Keep software/applications updated with security patches; and 
•  Be aware of actions they can take to better protect their agency’s information.  These 
actions include, but are not limited to, proper password usage, data backup, proper 
antivirus protection, reporting any suspected incidents or violations of security policy, 
and following rules established to avoid social engineering attacks and rules to deter the 
spread of spam or viruses and worms. 

Special Publication 800-50 recommends addressing these topics in agency security awareness 
campaigns.  Other topics may include accessing unknown email and attachments, dealing with 
spam, protecting against “shoulder surfing (i.e., someone reading a document or a computer 
screen from behind the user),” physical protection of data (e.g., from water, fire, dust or dirt, 
physical access), inventory and property transfer, personal use of systems at work and home, 
use of encryption, transmission of sensitive/confidential information, laptop security, and 
personally-owned systems and software. 

In Special Publication 800-46, “Security for Telecommuting and Broadband Communications,” 
NIST helps Federal agencies address security issues by providing recommendations on 

 
 
 
 
OPM-VI-I-13 

securing a variety of applications, protocols, and networking architectures to be used by 
teleworkers.  NIST recommendations encompass the following five security principles: 

•  All home networks connected to the Internet via a broadband connection should have 

some firewall device installed. 

•  Web browsers should be configured to limit vulnerability to intrusion. 
•  Operating system configuration options should be selected to increase security. 
•  Selection of wireless and other home networking technologies should be in accordance 

with security goals. 

•  Federal agencies should provide teleworking users with guidance on selecting 

appropriate technologies, software, and tools consistent with the agency network and 
with agency security policies. 

Complete texts of these and other NIST publications are available at 
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/.  

Manager Security Responsibilities 

•  Thoroughly review all telework agreements to ensure they are in compliance with 

agency information security policies. 

•  Ensure employees receive agency information systems security training. 
•  Work with employees to ensure they fully understand and have the technical expertise to 

comply with agency requirements. 
Invest in technology and equipment that can support success. 

• 
•  Work with employees to develop secure systems for potentially sensitive documents and 

other materials. 

•  Track removal and return of potentially sensitive materials, such as personnel records. 
•  Enforce personal privacy requirements for records. 

Teleworker Security Responsibilities 

•  Participate in agency information systems security training. 
•  Achieve sufficient technical proficiency to implement the required measures. 
•  Provide a high level of security to any personal or private information accessed at the 

telework site or transported between locations. 

•  Remain sensitive to individual rights to personal privacy. 
•  Comply with agency policies and with any additional requirements spelled out in the 

telework agreement. 

Emergency Response Telework:   
Continuity of Operations (COOP)  

Telework should be part of all agency emergency planning.  Management must be committed to 
implementing remote work arrangements as broadly as possible to take full advantage of the 
potential of telework for this purpose and ensure that— 

•  Equipment, technology, and technical support have been tested 
•  Employees are comfortable with technology and communications methods 
•  Managers are comfortable managing a distributed workgroup 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OPM-VI-I-14 

In addition, agencies and management should consider investing in and using— 

•  Teleconferencing, videoconferencing, and other technologies that enable multi-channel 

communication 
•  Paperless systems 

Continuity of Operations (COOP) 

The Federal Emergency Management Agency’s Federal Continuity Directive (FDC) 1 defines 
COOP planning as “an effort within individual agencies to ensure they can continue to perform 
their Mission Essential Functions (MEFs) and Primary Mission Essential Functions (PMEFs) 
during a wide range of emergencies, including localized acts of nature, accidents, and 
technological or attack-related emergencies. 

Telework can play a vital role in helping agencies preserve their essential functionality in this 
environment. 

Manager COOP Responsibilities 

•  Understand the agency COOP plan and management roles in executing the plan. 
•  Notify employees designated as essential personnel for COOP. 
•  Communicate expectations both to COOP and non-COOP employees regarding what 

steps they need to take in case of an emergency. 

•  Establish communication processes to notify COOP and non-COOP employees of 

COOP status in the event of an emergency. 
Integrate COOP expectations into telework agreements as appropriate. 

• 
•  Allow essential personnel who might telework in case of an emergency to telework 

regularly to ensure functionality. 

Teleworker COOP Responsibilities 

•  Maintain a current telework agreement detailing any COOP responsibilities, as 

appropriate. 

•  Practice telework regularly to ensure effectiveness. 
•  Be familiar with agency and workgroup COOP plans and individual expectations during 

COOP events. 

Pandemic 

The National Strategy for Pandemic Influenza Implementation Plan references the benefits of 
using telework to slow the spread of disease by keeping face-to-face contact to a minimum 
(often referred to as “social distancing”) while maintaining operations as close to normal as 
possible.  Telework can also help agencies retain functionality as infrastructure issues and other 
challenges make the main worksite difficult to access. 

The key to successful use of telework in the event of a pandemic health crisis is an effective 
routine telework program.  As many employees as possible should have telework capability (i.e., 
current telework arrangements, connectivity, and equipment commensurate with their work 
needs and frequent enough opportunities to telework to ensure all systems have been tested 
and are known to be functional).  This may entail creative thinking beyond current 
implementation of telework, drawing in employees who otherwise might not engage in remote 
access and ensuring their effectiveness as a distributed workforce. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OPM-VI-I-15 

Manager Pandemic Responsibilities 

• 

Implement telework to the greatest extent possible in the workgroup so systems are in 
place to support successful remote work in an emergency. 

•  Communicate expectations to all employees regarding their roles and responsibilities in 

relation to remote work in the event of a pandemic health crisis. 

•  Establish communication processes to notify employees of activation of this plan. 
Integrate pandemic health crisis response expectations into telework agreements. 
• 
•  With the employee, assess requirements for working at home (supplies and equipment 

needed for an extended telework period). 

•  Determine how all employees who may telework will communicate with one another and 

with management to accomplish work. 
Identify how time and attendance will be maintained. 

• 

Teleworker Pandemic Responsibilities 

•  Maintain current telework agreement specifying pandemic health crisis telework 

responsibilities, as appropriate. 

•  Perform all duties assigned by management, even if they are outside usual or customary 

duties. 

•  Practice telework regularly to ensure effectiveness. 
•  Be familiar with agency and workgroup pandemic health crisis plans and individual 

expectations for telework during a pandemic health crisis. 

 
 
 
 
OPM-VI-I-16 

References 

Federal Employee’s Emergency Guide 
Office of Personnel Management 
http://www.opm.gov/emergency/PDF/EmployeesGuide.pdf 

Federal Information Security Management Act (FISMA) 
http://csrc.nist.gov/groups/SMA/fisma/index.html 

Federal Management Regulation (FMR) Bulletin 2006-B3 
Guidelines for Alternative Workplace Arrangements  
Link to FMR Bulletin No. 2006-B3 

Federal Manager’s/Decision Maker’s Emergency Guide 
Office of Personnel Management 
http://www.opm.gov/emergency/PDF/ManagersGuide.pdf 

Federal Continuity Directive (FDC) 1 
http://www.fema.gov/pdf/about/offices/fcd1.pdf 

GAO-03-679, July 2003 
Report to the Chairman, Committee on Government Reform, House of Representatives 
Human Capital: Further Guidance, Assistance, and Coordination Can Improve Federal Telework 
Efforts 
http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d03679.pdf 

GAO-06-713, May 2006 
Report to the Chairman, Committee on Government Reform, House of Representatives 
Continuity of Operations:  Selected Agencies Could Improve Planning for Use of Alternate 
Facilities and Telework during Disruptions 
http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d06713.pdf 

National Strategy for Pandemic Influenza Implementation Plan 
http://www.whitehouse.gov/homeland/pandemic-influenza.html 

NIST Special Publication 800-46 Revision 1
Guide to Enterprise Telework and Remote Access Security 
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-46-rev1/sp800-46r1.pdf 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
