From:
To:
Subject:
Date:
Attachments:

Meindl, Max
Bergin, John
RE: Non-Responsive Employees in Vaccine Status System
Thursday, October 21, 2021 8:30:00 AM
image001.png

Half transparency:
No RA process has been adequately or appropriately identified to date.
RE:
10/13/2021 email received:
We want to ensure this requirement and the consequences of not meeting it are fully understood:
If you are vaccinated, you must provide proof of vaccination by November 9, 2021 via the Vaccine
Status System. This week, you will receive an email with instructions for how to submit your proof of
vaccination.
If you wish to file a request for a reasonable accommodation exempting you from this requirement,
you must do so by November 9, 2021.
Information about how to request a reasonable accommodation on medical or religious grounds will
be provided within the next two weeks.
You will be given ample time to submit your request.
If your request is not approved, you will have two weeks (14 days) to receive a single dose
vaccination or the first dose of a two-dose vaccination should you choose to comply with the EO.
If you choose to remain unvaccinated and have not received approval for a reasonable
accommodation, you will be subject to discipline, up to and including removal from federal service.

Accommodation Requests
Employees cannot use the VSS to submit an exemption request from the COVID-19 vaccination
requirement for medical, disability, or religious reasons at this time.
Future updates to VSS will include this functionality.
Once VSS is updated to include this functionality, FEMA will communicate requirements.
Any accommodation request that has already been submitted will not be adjudicated until further
guidance is provided.
Employees may be required to provide additional documentation once the official process is
finalized.
Accommodation requests will be considered and adjudicated consistent with applicable guidance
and law.
If a request for an accommodation is denied, employees will be provided a reasonable amount of
time following the denial to become fully vaccinated.

___________________________________
Max J Meindl, PMP
Program Delivery Task Force Lead | DR-4611-LA Debris Task Force|Emergency Management
Specialist
Duty Station: 4611DR DR - Baton Rouge, Louisiana - JFO ROR| Region 6

Mobile: 202-374-9426
max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov

 
 
 
Federal Emergency Management Agency
www.FEMA.gov

WARNING: This email contains FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (FOUO) OR PRIVACY DATA. 
It may contain information exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552). 
The information contained herein must be controlled, stored, handled, transmitted, distributed, and disposed of in accordance with DHS policy relating to FOUO/PII
information and is not to be released to the public or other personnel who do not have a valid “need-to-know” without prior approval of an authorized DHS official.

From: Bergin, John <john.bergin@fema.dhs.gov> 
Sent: Wednesday, October 20, 2021 9:15 PM
To: Meindl, Max <max.meindl@fema.dhs.gov>
Subject: Fwd: Non-Responsive Employees in Vaccine Status System

Full transparency,

Read below. Follow the steps and this may be your way through

John Bergin
Emergency Management Specialist | Public Assistance | Region 6 
Cell: 202.705.9463
john.bergin@fema.dhs.gov |Pronouns: he/him

From: FEMA-COVID-Vaccine <fema-covid-vaccine@fema.dhs.gov>
Sent: Wednesday, October 20, 2021 7:52:13 PM
To: Bergin, John <john.bergin@fema.dhs.gov>
Subject: Non-Responsive Employees in Vaccine Status System

Notice  to  Supervisors  of  Employees  with  a  Non-Attestation  Status  for
the COVID-19 Vaccination

Subject: Non-Responsive Employees in Vaccine Status System

Dear BERGIN, JOHN W,

Our records indicate that the following individuals on your staff have not submitted any
information into the Vaccine Status System (VSS) as of October 20, 202. These individuals
are also receiving a separate reminder message from this mailbox about their non-responsive
status in VSS. If any of these individuals do not directly report to you, please work with your
timekeeper to make necessary corrections in WebTA. If you are a Temporary Duty
Supervisor, do not change employees’ WebTA certifier back to their Supervisor of Record.   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MEINDL, MAX

All FEMA employees, including those seeking an exemption from the vaccination
requirement for religious or medical reasons, must submit their vaccination status via the
Vaccination Status System (VSS) by November 9, 2021.

As a supervisor, you must remind your employees of the requirement to submit proof of their
vaccination status in the VSS. You may use language from the sample message below and the
attached upload instructions to contact your employees individually.

As a reminder, all federal employees must be fully vaccinated by November 22, 2021, except
in limited circumstances in which an employee receives or has requested a legally required
accommodation. This requirement is necessary to protect the health and safety of the federal
workforce and the members of the public with which we interact.

If you have any questions, please reach out to FEMA-COVID-Vaccine@fema.dhs.gov.

Sample Message to Non-Responsive Employees in VSS:

Dear MEINDL, MAX,

Upon review of Vaccine Status System data, it appears that you have not yet attested to your
vaccination status as of October 20, 2021.

All FEMA employees, including those who seek an exemption from the vaccination
requirement for religious or medical reasons, must complete and submit their vaccination
status via the VSS by November 9, 2021.

As a reminder, all federal employees must be fully vaccinated by November 22, 2021, except
in limited circumstances in which an employee receives or has requested a legally required
exemption. This requirement is necessary to protect the health and safety of the federal
workforce and the members of the public with which we interact.

The VSS now includes the functionality necessary to collect proof of vaccination as required
by the Executive Order and implementing guidance. You are required to upload proof of your
vaccination status in VSS.  

If you do not have proof of vaccination, you must contact your place of vaccination or
healthcare provider to obtain documentation that can be electronically uploaded into the
system by November 9.

If you intend to seek a religious or medical accommodation, select the option “I have not been
vaccinated” in VSS and submit an accommodation request once available. More information
on submitting a request is forthcoming.

Employees  who  fail  to  comply  with  the  Executive  Order  14043  requirement  to  be  fully
vaccinated  and  provide  proof  of  vaccination,  except  employees  who  have  a  pending  or
approved  vaccination  accommodation  request,  may  be  subject  to  discipline,  up  to  and

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
including termination. 

Additional  resources  and  frequently  asked  questions  (FAQ)  are  available  on  the  DHS  VSS
Connect  page  and  the  COVID-19  Employee  Hub.  Visit  the  Employee  Resources  page  for
more information on DHS’s COVID-19 guidance.

 
 
