DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY
Federal Emergency Management Agency
REQUEST FOR REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION

 Privacy Act Statement 

Authority: The Privacy Act of 1974 (Privacy Act), 5 U.S.C. ยง 552a as amended, requires that you provide FEMA with certain information in order to process a 
request. The Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 29 U.S.C. ยง 701 as amended, stipulates that Federal agencies must provide reasonable accommodation to qualified 
individuals  with  disabilities.  Further,  Executive  Order  13164  mandates  that  Federal  agencies  provide  written  procedures  for  requesting  reasonable 
accommodations and maintain records in order to monitor the procedure's effectiveness.  
Purpose: To provide reasonable accommodations to employees and applicants with disabilities according to Executive Order 13164.  
Routine Uses: The information on this form may be disclosed as generally permitted under 5 U.S.C. ยง 552a(b) of the Privacy Act of 1974, as amended. This 
includes using this information as necessary and authorized by the routine uses published in DHS/ALL-033 - Reasonable Accommodations Records System of 
Records, 76 Fed. Reg. 41,274 (July 13, 2011) and upon written request, by agreement, or as required by law.  
Disclosure: FEMA's obligation to consider an individual's request for reasonable accommodation begins when the individual makes the request. However, the 
Request  for  Reasonable  Accommodation  form  should  be  filled  out  as  soon  as  possible  following  a  request.  The  disclosure  of  information  on  this  form  is 
voluntary; however, failure to provide the requested information may prevent FEMA from accommodating your request. 

1. Applicant's/Employee's Name

3. Organization/Office

2. Telephone Number

4. Date of Request

5. Accommodation Requested (Be as specific as possible, e.g., sign language interpreter, or adaptive equipment such as voice recognition/keyboards, screen 
readers/magnification, etc.):

6. Reason for Request:

7. If accommodation is time sensitive, please explain:

8. Applicant's/Employee's Title

9.  Applicant's/Employee's Signature

10. Date

FEMA FORM 256-0-1 (10/14)

Page 1 of 2

  
MANAGEMENT RESPONSE TO REQUEST FOR REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION

11. Request for Reasonable Accommodation (check one):

 Granted

Interim/Alternate Granted (Provide comments in number 16)

 Denied (if denied, answer questions in number 13 )

12. Applicant's/Employee's Name

13. Request for Reasonable Accommodation Denied Because (May check more than one box):

 Accommodation Ineffective

 Accommodation Would Cause Undue Hardship

 Accommodation Would Require Removal of an Essential Function of the job

 Medical Documentation Inadequate

 Accommodation Would Require Lowering of Performance or Production Standard

 Other (Please identify):

14. Detailed reason(s) for the denial of reasonable accommodation (Must be specific, e.g., why accommodation is ineffective or causes undue hardship):

15. If the individual proposed one type of reasonable accommodation which is being denied, but rejected an offer of a different type of reasonable 
accommodation, explain both the reason for the denial of the requested accommodation and why you believe the chosen accommodation would be effective: 

16. Comments

17. If an individual wishes to request reconsideration of this decision, she/he must take the following steps:

An employee may appeal directly to his/her Second Level Supervisor.  The employee may present additional information in support of his/her request.

An applicant may appeal directly to the Disability Employment Program Manager of the Office of Equal Rights.  The applicant may present additional 
information in support of his/her request.

18. If an individual wishes to file an EEO Complaint, or to pursue MSPB or union grievance procedures, she/he must take the following steps:

For an EEO complaint pursuant to 29 C.F.R. 1614, contact an EEO Counselor in the Office of Equal Rights within 45 days from the date of this denial 
of reasonable accommodation; or
For a collective bargaining claim, file a written grievance in accordance with the provisions of the Collective Bargaining Agreement; or 

Initiate an appeal to the Merit Systems Protection Board within 30 days of an appealable adverse action as defined in 5 C.F.R. 1201.3

19. Name Of Deciding Official

20. Signature Of Deciding Official

21. Date

1 Copy of this form must be provided to the employee or applicant who made the request. 
1 Copy of this form must be provided to the Disability Employment Program Manager of the Office of Equal Rights.

FEMA FORM 256-0-1 (10/14)

Page 2 of 2

